THE HISTORY OF ENGLISH POETRY.
SECT. XLIV.
MORE poetry was written in the single reign of Elizabeth, than in the two preceding centuries. The same causes, among others already enumerated and explained, which called forth genius and imagination, such as the new sources of fiction opened by a study of the classics, a familiarity with the French Italian and Spanish writers, the growing elegancies of the English language, the diffusion of polished manners, the felicities of long peace and public prosperity, and a certain freedom and activity of mind which immediately followed the national emancipation from superstition, contributed also to produce innumerable compositions in poetry. In prosecuting my further examination of the poetical annals of this reign, it there
ore becomes necessary to reduce such a latitude of materials to some sort of methodical arrangement. On which account, I shall class and consider the poets of this reign, under the general heads, or divisions, of SATIRE, SONNET, PASTORAL, and MISCELLANEOUS poetry. Spenser will stand alone, without a class, and without a rival.
Satire, specifically so called, did not commence in England till the latter end of the reign of queen Elizabeth. We have seen, indeed, that eclogues, and allegories were made the vehicle of satire, and that many poems of a satirical tendency had been published, long ago. And here, the censure was rather confined to the corruptions of the clergy, than extended to popular follies and vices. But the first professed English satirist, to speak technically, is bishop Joseph Hall, successively bishop of Exeter and Norwich, born at Bristow-park within the parish of Ashby de la Zouch in Leicestershire, in the year 1574, and at the age of fifteen, in the year 1588, admitted into Emanuel-college at Cambridge, where he remained about eight years. He soon became eminent in the theology of those times, preached against predestination before prince Henry with unrivalled applause, and discussed the doctrines of Arminianism in voluminous dissertations. But so variable are our studies, and so fickle is opinion, that the poet is better known to posterity than the prelate or the polemic. His satires have outlived his sermons at court, and his laborious confutations of the Brownists. One of his later controversial tracts is, however, remembered on account of the celebrity of its antagonist. When Milton descended from his dignity to plead the cause of fanaticism and ideal liberty, bishop Hall was the defender of our hierarchical establishment. Bayle, who knew Hall only as a theologist, seems to have written his life merely because he was one of the English divines at the Synod of Dort, in 1618. From his inflexible and conscientious attachment to the royal and episcopal cause under king Charles the first, he suffered in his old age the severities of imprisonment and sequestration; and lived to see his cathedral converted into a barrack, and his palace into an ale-house. His uncommon learning was meliorated with great penetration and knowledge of the world, and his mildness of manners and his humility were characteristical. He died, and was obscurely buried without a memorial on his grave, in 1656, and in his eighty second year, at Heigham a small village near Norwich, where he had sought shelter from the storms of usurpation, and the intolerance of presbyterianism.
I have had the good fortune to see bishop Hall's funeralsermon, preached some days after his interment, on the thirtieth day of September, 1656, at saint Peter's church in Norwich, by one John Whitefoote, Master of Arts, and rector of Heigham. The preacher, no contemptible orator, before he proceeds to draw a parallel between our prelate and the patriarch Israel, thus illustrates that part of his character with which we are chiefly concerned, and which I am now hastening to consider.
"Two yeares together he was chosen rhetorick professor in the universitie of Cambridge, and performed the office with extraordinary applause. He was noted for a singular wit from his youth: a most acute rhetorician, and an elegant poet. He understood many tongues; and in the rhetorick of his own, he was second to none that lived in his time
Fol. 3.
."
It is much to our present purpose to observe, that the style of his prose is strongly tinctured with the manner of Seneca. The writer of the satires is perceptible in some of his gravest polemical or scriptural treatises; which are perpetually interspersed with excursive illustrations, familiar allusions, and observations on life. Many of them were early translated into French; and their character is well drawn by himself, in a dedication to James the first, who perhaps would have much better relished a more sedate and profound theology.
"Seldome any man hath offered to your royall hands a greater bundle of his owne thoughts, nor perhaps more varietie of discourse. For here shall your maiestie find Moralitie, like a good handmaid, waiting on Divinitie: and Divinitie, like some great lady, euery day in seuerall dresses. Speculation interchanged with experience, Positiue theology with polemical, textuall with discursorie, popular with scholasticall
WORKS, Lond. 1628. sol. vol. i. p. 3.
."
At the age of twenty-three, while a student at Emanuelcollege, and in the year 1597, he published at London three Books of anonymous Satires, which he called
Toothless
SATYRS,
poetical, academical, moral
In small duodecimo, Wh. Let. But see the Catalogue to Mr. Capell's SHAKESPERIANA, given to Trinity college Cambridge, NUM. 347.
"Virgidemiarum, libri 6. Satires, Hall. 1597, 80 ."
. They were printed by Thomas Creede for Robert Dexter, and are not recited in the registers of the Stationers of London. The following year, and licenced by the stationers, three more books appeared, entitled,
"VIRGIDEMIARUM, The three last Bookes of
Byting
Satyres."
These are without his name, and were printed by Richard Bradock for Robert Dexter, in the size and letter of the last
In pages 106. With vignettes. Entered, March 30, 1598, to R. Dexter. REGISTR. STATION. C. f. 33. a. Ames recites an edition of all the SIX BOOKS, in 68 pages, in 1598. HIST. PRINT. p. 434. I suspect this to be a mistake.
. All the six Books were printed together in 1599, in the same form, with this title,
"VIRGIDEMIARUM, The three last Bookes of
byting
Satyres corrected and amended with some additions by J. H. [John Hall.] LONDON, for R. Dexter, &c. 1599."
A most incomprehensive and inaccurate title: for this edition, the last and the best, contains the three first as well as the three last Books
A modern edition, however, a thin duodecimo, was printed at Oxford, for R. Clements, 1753, under the direction of Mr. Thomson, late fellow of Queen's college Oxford. The editors followed an edition bought from Lord Oxford's library, which they destroyed, when the new one was finished.
. It begins with the first three books: then at the end of the third book, follow the three last, but preceded by a new title,
"VIRGIDEMIARUM. The three last Bookes, of byting Satyres. Corrected and amended with some additions by J. H."
For R. Dexter, as before, 1599. But the seventh of the fourth Book is here made a second satire to the sixth or last Book. Annexed are,
"Certaine worthye manvscript poems of great antiquitie reserued long since in the studie of a Northfolke gentleman, And now first published by J. S. I.
The stately tragedy of Guistard and Sismond.
II.
The Northerne mother's blessing.
III.
The way to Thrifte.
Imprinted at London for R. D. 1597."
Dedicated,
"to the worthiest poet Maister Ed. Spenser."
To this identical impression of Hall's Satires, and the Norfolk gentleman's manuscript poems annexed, a false title appeared in 1602,
"VIRGIDEMIARUM. Sixe Bookes. First three bookes, Of toothlesse Satyrs. 1. POETICALL. 2. ACADEMICALL. 3. MORAL. London, Printed by John Harison, for Robert Dexter, 1602."
All that follows is exactly what is in the edition of 1599. By VIRGIDEMIA, an uncouth and uncommon word, we are to understand a Gathering or Harvest of rods, in reference to the nature of the subject.
These satires are marked with a classical precision, to which English poetry had yet rarely attained. They are replete with animation of style and sentiment. The indignation of the satirist is always the result of good sense. Nor are the thorns of severe invective unmixed with the flowers of pure poetry. The characters are delineated in strong and lively colouring, and their discriminations are touched with the masterly traces of genuine humour. The versification is equally energetic and elegant, and the fabric of the couplets approaches to the modern standard. It is no inconsiderable proof of a genius predominating over the general taste of an age when every preacher was a punster, to have written verses, where laughter was to be raised, and the reader to be entertained with sallies of pleasantry, without quibbles and conceits. His chief fault is obscurity, arising from a remote phraseology, constrained combinations, unfamiliar allusions, elleiptical apostrophes, and abruptness of expression. Perhaps some will think, that his manner betrays too much of the laborious exactness and pedantic anxiety of the scholar and the student. Ariosto in Italian, and Regnier in French, were now almost the only modern writers of satire: and I believe there had been an English translation of Ariosto's satires. But Hall's acknowledged patterns are Juvenal and Persius, not without some touches of the urbanity of Horace. His parodies of these poets, or rather his adaptations of antient to modern manners, a mode of imitation not unhappily practiced by Oldham, Rochester, and Pope, discover great facility and dexterity of invention. The moral gravity and the censorial declamation of Juvenal, he frequently enlivens with a train of more refined reflection, or adorns with a novelty and variety of images.
In the opening of his general PROLOGUE, he expresses a decent consciousness of the difficulty and danger of his new undertaking. The laurel which he sought had been unworn, and it was not to be won without hazard.
I FIRST ADVENTURE, with fool-hardy might,
To tread the steps of perilous despight:
I FIRST ADVENTURE, follow me who list,
And be the SECOND ENGLISH SATIRIST.
His first book, containing nine satires, is aimed at the numerous impotent yet fashionable scribblers with which his age was infested. It must be esteemed a curious and valuable picture, drawn from real life, of the abuses of poetical composition which then prevailed; and which our author has at once exposed with the wit of a spirited satirist, and the good taste of a judicious critic. Of Spenser, who could not have been his cotemporary at Cambridge, as some have thought, but perhaps was his friend, he constantly speaks with respect and applause.
I avail myself of a more minute analysis of this Book, not only as displaying the critical talents of our satirist, but as historical of the poetry of the present period, and illustrative of my general subject. And if in general, I should be thought too copious and prolix in my examination of these satires, my apology must be, my wish to revive a neglected writer of real genius, and my opinion, that the first legitimate author in our language of a species of poetry of the most important and popular utility, which our countrymen have so successfully cultivated, and from which Pope derives his chief celebrity, deserved to be distinguished with a particular degree of attention.
From the first satire, which I shall exhibit at length, we learn what kinds of pieces were then most in fashion, and in what manner they were written. They seem to have been, tales of love and chivalry, amatorial sonnets, tragedies, comedies, and pastorals.
Nor ladie's wanton loue, nor wandering knight,
Legend I out in rimes all richly dight:
Nor fright the reader, with the pagan vaunt
Of mightie Mahound, and great Termagaunt
Saracen divinities.
.
Nor list I sonnet of my mistress' face,
To paint some Blowesse
In modern ballads, Blousilinda, or Blousibella. Doctor Johnson interprets BLOWZE, a ruddy fat-faced wench. DICT. in V.
with a borrow'd grace.
Nor can I bide
Abide, bear, endure.
to pen some hungrie
Perhaps the true reading is
angrie,
that is, impassioned. These satires have been most carelessly printed.
scene
For thick-skin ears, and undiscerning eene:
Nor euer could my scornfull Muse abide
With tragicke shoes
Buskins.
her anckles for to hide.
Nor can I crouch, and withe my fawning tayle,
To some great patron, for my best auayle.
Such hunger-starven trencher poetrie
Poetry written by hirelings for bread.
,
Or let it neuer liue, or timely die!
Nor vnder euerie bank, and euerie tree,
Speake rimes vnto mine oaten minstrelsie:
Nor carol our so pleasing liuely laies
As might the Graces moue my mirth to praise
Perhaps this couplet means Comedy.
.
Trumpet, and reeds, and socks, and buskins fine,
I them bequeathe
Heroic poetry, pastorals, comedy, and tragedy, I leave to the celebrated established masters in those different kinds of composition, such as Spensor and Shakespeare. Unless the classic poets are intended. The imitation from Persius's PROLOGUE is obvious.
, whose statues th' wandring twine
Of iuie, mix'd with bayes, circles around,
Their liuing temples likewise lawrel-bound.
Rather had I, albe in careless rimes,
Check the misorder'd world, and lawless times.
Nor need I craue the Muse's midwifry,
To bring to birth so worthless poetry.
Or, if we list
Or, even if I was willing to invoke a muse, &c.
, what baser Muse can bide
To sit and sing by Granta's naked side?
They haunt the tided Thames and salt Medway,
Eer since the fame of their late bridal day.
Nought have we here but willow-shaded shore,
To tell our Grant his bankes are left forlore
B. i. 1. f. 1. edit. 1599.
.
The compliment in the close to Spenser, is introduced and turned with singular address and elegance. The allusion is to Spenser's beautiful episode of the marriage of Thames and Medway, recently published, in 1595, in the fourth book of the second part of the FAIRY QUEEN
B. iv. C. xi.
. But had I, says the poet, been inclined to invoke the assistance of a Muse, what Muse, even of a lower order, is there now to be found, who would condescend to sit and sing on the desolated margin of the Cam? The Muses frequent other rivers, ever since Spenser celebrated the nuptials of Thames and Medway. Cam has now nothing on his banks but willows, the types of desertion.
I observe here in general, that Thomas Hudson and Henry Lock, were the Bavius and Mevius of this age. In the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, 1606, they are thus consigned to oblivion by Judicio.
"Locke and Hudson, sleep you quiet shavers among the shavings of the press, and let your books lie in some old nook amongst old boots and shoes, so you may avoid my censure
A. i. S. ii.
."
Hudson translated into English Du Bartas's poem of JUDITH AND HOLOFERNES, in which is this couplet.
And at her eare a pearle of greater valew
There hung, than that th' Egyptian queene did swallow.
Yet he is commended by Harrington for making this translation in a
"verie good and sweet English verse
Transl. ORL. FUR. Notes, B. xxxv. p. 296. 1633. Hence, or from an old Play, the name HOLOFERNES got into Shakespeare.
,"
and is largely cited in ENGLAND'S PARNASSUS, 1600. Lock applied the Sonnet to a spiritual purpose, and substituting christian love in the place of amorous passion, made it the vehicle of humiliation, holy comfort, and thanksgiving. This book he dedicated, under the title of the PASSIONATE PRESENT to queen Elizabeth, who perhaps from the title expected to be entertained with a subject of very different nature
I have before cited this Collection, which appeared in 1597, vol. iii. 445. That was a second edition. To his ECCLESIASTES there is a recommendatory poem by Lilly. Some of David's Psalms in verse appear with his name the same year.
.
In the second satire, our author poetically laments that the nine Muses are no longer vestal virgins.
Whilom the Muses nine were vestal maides,
And held their temple in the secret shades
Of faire Parnassvs, that two-headed hill
Whose avncient fame the southern world did fill:
And in the stead of their eternal fame
Was the cool stream, that took his endless name
From out the fertile hoof of winged steed:
There did they sit, and do their holy deed
That pleas'd both heaven and earth.—
He complains, that the
rabble of rymesters new
have engrafted the myrtle on the bay; and that poetry, departing from its antient moral tendency, has been unnaturally perverted to the purposes of corruption and impurity. The Muses have changed, in defiance of chastity,
Their modest stole to garish looser weed,
Deckt with loue-fauours, their late whoredom's meed.
While the pellucid spring of Pyrene is converted into a poisonous and muddy puddle.
—Whose infectious staine
Corrupteth all the lowly fruitfull plaine
B. i. 2. f. 4.
.
Marlow's OVID'S ELEGIES, and some of the dissolute sallies of Green and Nash, seem to be here pointed out. I know not of any edition of Marston's PYGMALION'S IMAGE before the year 1598, and the CALTHA POETARUM, or BUMBLE-BEE, one of the most exceptionable books of this kind, written by T. Cutwode, appeared in 1599
To R. Olave, April 17, 1599. REGISTR. STATION. C. f. 50. b.
. Shakespeare's VENUS AND ADONIS, published in 1593, had given great offence to the graver readers of English verse
This we learn from a poem entitled,
"A Scourge for Paper-persecutors, by J. D. with an Inquisition against Paperpersecutors by A. H. Lond. for H. H."
1625. 4to. Signat. A. 3.
Making lewd Venus with eternall lines
To tye Adonis to her loues designes:
Fine wit is shewn therein, but finer 'twere
If not attired in such bawdy geere:
But be it as it will, the coyest dames
In priuate reade it for their closet-games.
See also Freeman's Epigrams, the Second Part, entitled, RUN AND A GREAT CAST, Lond. 1614. 4to. EPIGR. 92. Signat. K. 3.
TO MASTER WILLIAM SHAKESPEARE.
Shakespeare, that nimble Mercury thy braine, &c.
Who list reade lust, there's VENUS AND ADONIS,
True model of a most lasciuious letcher.
.
In the subsequent satire, our author more particularly censures the intemperance of his brethren; and illustrates their absolute inability to write, till their imaginations were animated by wine, in the following apt and witty comparison, which is worthy of Young.
As frozen dunghills in a winter's morn,
That void of vapours seemed all beforn,
Soon as the sun sends out his piercing beams,
Exhale forth filthy smoak, and stinking steams;
So doth the base and the fore-barren brain,
Soon as the raging wine begins to raign.
In the succeeding lines, he confines his attack to Marlow, eminent for his drunken frolicks, who was both a player and a poet, and whose tragedy of TAMERLANE THE GREAT, represented before the year 1588, published in 1590, and confessedly one of the worst of his plays, abounds in bombast. Its false splendour was also burlesqued by Beaumont and Fletcher in the COXCOMB; and it has these two lines, which are ridiculed by Pistol, in Shakespeare's KING HENRY THE FOURTH
A. ii. S. iv.
, addressed to the captive princes who drew Tamerlane's chariot.
Holla, you pamper'd jades of Asia,
What, can ye draw but twenty miles a day?
We should, in the mean time, remember, that by many of the most skilful of our dramatic writers, tragedy was now thought almost essentially and solely to consist, in the pomp of declamation, in sounding expressions, and unnatural amplifications of style. But to proceed.
One, higher pitch'd, doth set his soaring thought
On crowned kings that fortune low hath brought;
Or some vpreared high-aspiring swaine,
As it might be the Turkish Tamberlaine
There is a piece entered to R. Jones, Aug. 14. 1590, entitled,
"Comicall discourses of Tamberlain the Cithian [Scythian] shepherd."
REGISTR. STATION. B. f. 262. b. Probably the story of Tamerlane was introduced into our early drama from the following publication,
"The historie of the great emperour Tamerlane, drawn from the antient monuments of the Arabians. By messire Jean du Bec, abbot of Mortimer. Translated into English by H. M. London, for W. Ponsonbie, 1597."
4to. I cite from a second edition.
:
Then weeneth he his base drink-drowned spright
Rapt to the threefold loft of heauen's hight:
When he conceiues upon his faigned stage
The stalking steps of his great personage
Graced with huff cap termes, and thundering threats,
That his poor hearers hair qvite vpright sets,
So soon as some braue minded hungrie youth
Sees fitly frame to his wide-strained mouth,
He vaunts his voice vpon a hired stage,
With high-set steps, and princelie carriage.—
There if he can with termes Italianate,
Big-sounding sentences, and words of state,
Faire patch me vp his pure iambicke verse,
He rauishes the gazing scoffolders
Those who sate on the scaffold, a part of the play-house which answered to our upper-gallery. So again, B. iv. 2. f. 13.
When a craz'd scaffold, and a rotten stage,
Was all rich Nenius his heritage.
See the conformation of our old English theater accurately investigated in the SUPPLEMENT TO SHAKESPEARE, i. 9. seq. [See supr. vol. iii. 327.]
.
But, adds the critical satirist, that the minds of the astonished audience may not be too powerfully impressed with the terrours of tragic solemnity, a VICE, or buffoon, is suddenly and most seasonably introduced.
Now lest such frightful shews of fortvne's fall,
And bloody tyrant's rage, should chance appall
The dead-struck audience, mid the silent rout
Comes leaping in a self-misformed lout,
And laughs, and grins, and frames his mimic face,
And jostles straight into the prince's place.—
A goodlie hotch-potch, when vile russetings
Are match'd with monarchs, and with mighty kings:
A goodly grace to sober tragick muse,
When each base clowne his clumsy fist doth bruise
In striking the benches to express applause.
!
To complete these genuine and humorous anecdotes of the state of our stage in the reign of Elizabeth, I make no apology for adding the paragraph immediately following, which records the infancy of theatric criticism.
Meanwhile our poets, in high parliament,
Sit watching euerie word and gesturement,
Like curious censors of some doutie gear,
Whispering their verdict in their fellows ear.
Woe to the word, whose margin in their scrole
Copy.
Is noted with a black condemning coal!
But if each period might the synod please,
Ho! bring the ivie boughs, and bands of bayes
B. i. 3. f. 8.
.
In the beginning of the next satire, he resumes this topic. He seems to have conceived a contempt for blank verse; observing that the English iambic is written with little trouble, and seems rather a spontaneous effusion, than an artificial construction.
Too popular is tragick poesie,
Straining his tiptoes for a farthing fee:
And doth, beside, on rimeless numbers tread:
Unbid iambicks flow from careless head.
He next inveighs against the poet, who
—in high heroic rimes
Compileth worm-eat stories of old times.
To these antique tales he condemns the application of the extravagant enchantments of Ariosto's ORLANDO FURIOSO, particularly of such licentious fictions as the removal of Merlin's tomb from Wales into France, or Tuscany, by the magic operations of the sorceress Melissa
See ORL. FUR. iii. 10. xxvi. 39.
. The ORLANDO had been just now translated by Harrington.
And maketh up his hard-betaken tale
With strange inchantments, fetch'd from darksom vale
Of some Melissa, who by magick doom
To Tuscans soile transporteth Merlin's tomb.
But he suddenly checks his career, and retracts his thoughtless temerity in presuming to blame such themes as had been immortalised by the fairy muse of Spenser.
But let no rebel satyr dare traduce
Th' eternal legends of thy faerie muse,
Renowned Spenser! Whom no earthly wight
Dares once to emulate, much less dares despight.
Salust
Du Bartas.
of France, and Tuscan Ariost,
Yield vp the lawrell garland ye haue lost
B. i. 4. f. 11. In the Stanzas called a DEFIANCE to ENVY, prefixed to the Satires, he declares his reluctance and inability to write pastorals after Spenser.
At Colin's feet I throw my yielding reede.
But in some of those stanzas in which he means to ridicule the pastoral, he proves himself admirably qualified for this species of poetry.
!
In the fifth, he ridicules the whining ghosts of the MIRROUR OF MAGISTRATES, which the ungenerous and unpitying poet sends back to hell, without a penny to pay Charon for their return over the river Styx
B. i. 5. f. 12.
.
In the sixth, he laughs at the hexametrical versification of the Roman prosody, so contrary to the genius of our language, lately introduced into English poetry by Stanihurst the translator of Virgil, and patronised by Gabriel Harvey and sir Philip Sidney.
Another scorns the homespun thread of rimes,
Match'd with the lofty feet of elder times.
Giue me the numbred verse that Virgil sung,
And Virgil's selfe shall speake the English tounge.—
The nimble dactyl striving to outgo
The drawling spondees, pacing it below:
The lingering spondees labouring to delay
The breathless dactyls with a sudden stay
B. i. 6. f. 13, 14.
.
His own lines on the subject are a proof that English verse wanted to borrow no graces from the Roman.
The false and foolish compliments of the sonnet-writer, are the object of the seventh satire.
Be she all sooty black, or berry brown,
She's white as morrow's milk, or flakes new-blown.
He judges it absurd, that the world should be troubled with the history of the smiles or frowns of a lady; as if all mankind were deeply interested in the privacies of a lover's heart, and the momentary revolutions of his hope and despair
B. i. 7. f. 15.
.
In the eighth, our author insinuates his disapprobation of sacred poetry, and the metrical versions of scripture, which were encouraged and circulated by the puritans. He glances at Robert Southwell's SAINT PETER'S COMPLAINT
Wood says that this poem was written by Davies of Hereford. ATH. OXON. i. 445. But he had given it to Southwell, p. 334.
, in which the saint
weeps pure Helicon,
published this year, and the same writer's FUNERALL TEARES of the two Maries. He then, but without mentioning his name, ridicules Markham's SION'S MUSE, a translation of Solomon's Song
See supr. vol. iii. p. 318.
. Here, says our satirical critic, Solomon assumes the character of a modern sonnetteer; and celebrates the sacred spouse of Christ with the levities and in the language of a lover singing the praises of his mistress
B. i. 8. f. 1 7.
.
The hero of the next satire I suspect to be Robert Greene, who practiced the vices which he so freely displayed in his poems. Greene, however, died three or four years before the publication of these satires
In 1593, Feb. 1, a piece is entered to Danter called Greene's Funerall. REGISTR. STATION, B. f. 304. b.
. Nor is it very likely that he should have been, as Oldys has suggested in some manuscript papers, Hall's cotemporary at Cambridge, for he was incorporated into the University of Oxford, as a Master of Arts from Cambridge, in July, under the year 1588
Registr. Univ. Oxon. sub ann.
. But why should we be sollicitous to recover a name, which indecency, most probably joined with dulness, has long ago deservedly delivered to oblivion? Whoever he was, he is surely unworthy of these elegant lines.
Envy, ye Muses, at your thriving mate!
Cupid hath crowned a new laureate.
I sawe his statue gayly tir'd in green,
As if he had some second Phebus been:
His statue trimm'd with the Venerean tree,
And shrined fair within your sanctuary.
What he, that erst to gain the rhyming goal, &c.
He then proceeds, with a liberal disdain, and with an eye on the stately buildings of his university, to reprobate the Muses for this unworthy profanation of their dignity.
Take this, ye Muses, this so high despight,
And let all hatefull, luckless birds of night,
Let screeching owles nest in your razed roofs;
And let your floor with horned satyr's hoofs
Be dinted and defiled euerie morn,
And let your walls be an eternal scorn!
His execration of the infamy of adding to the mischiefs of obscenity, by making it the subject of a book, is strongly expressed.
What if some Shoreditch
A part of the town notorious for brothels.
fury shoud incite
Some lust-stung lecher, must he needs
indite
The beastly rites of hired venery,
The whole world's uniuersal bawd to be?
Did neuer yet no damned libertine,
Nor older heathen, nor new Florentine
Peter Aretine.
, &c.
Our poets, too frequently the children of idleness, too naturally the lovers of pleasure, began now to be men of the world, and affected to mingle in the dissipations and debaucheries of the metropolis. To support a popularity of character, not so easily attainable in the obscurities of retirement and study, they frequented taverns, became libertines and buffoons, and exhilarated the circles of the polite and the profligate. Their way of life gave the colour to their writings: and what had been the favourite topic of conversation, was sure to please, when recommended by the graces of poetry. Add to this, that poets now began to write for hire, and a rapid sale was to be obtained at the expence of the purity of the reader's mind
Harrington has an Epigram on this subject. EPIGR. B. i. 40.
Poets hereaft for pensions need not care,
Who call you beggars, you may call them lyars;
Verses are grown svch merchantable ware,
That now for Sonnets, sellers are and buyers.
And again, he says a poet was paid
"two crownes a sonnet."
EPIGR. B. i. 39.
. The author of the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, acted in 1606, says of Drayton a true genius,
"However, he wants one true note of a poet of our times, and that is this: he cannot swagger it well in a tavern
A. i. S. ii.
."
The first satire of the second Book properly belongs to the last. In it, our author continues his just and pointed animadversions on immodest poetry, and hints at some pernicious versions from the FACETIAE of Poggius Florentinus, and from Rabelais. The last couplet of the passage I am going to transcribe, is most elegantly expressive.
But who conjur'd this bawdie Poggie's ghost
From out the stewes of his lewde home-bred coast;
Or wicked Rablais' drunken reuellings
Harvey, in his Foure Letters, 1592, mentions
"the fantasticall mould of Aretine or Rabelays."
p. 48. Aretine is mentioned in the last satire.
,
To grace the misrule of our tauernings?
Or who put bayes into blind Cupid's fist,
That he should crowne what laureates him list
B. ii. 1. f. 25.
?
By
tauernings,
he means the encreasing fashion of frequenting taverns, which seems to have multiplied with the playhou
es. As new modes of entertainment sprung up, and new places of public resort became common, the people were more often called together, and the scale of convivial life in London was enlarged. From the play-house they went to the tavern. In one of Decker's pamphlets, printed in 1609, there is a curious chapter,
"How a yong Gallant should behave himself in an Ordinarie
Decker's GULS HORNE BOOK, p. 22. There is an old quarto.
"The Meeting of Gallants at an Ordinarie, or the Walkes of Powles,"
1604. Jonson says of lieutenant Shift. EPIGR. xii.
He steales to Ordinaries, there he playes
At dice his borrowed money.—
And in CYNTHIA'S REVELLS, 1600.
"You must frequent Ordinaries a month more, to initiate yourself."
A. iii. S i.
.
One of the most expensive and elegant meetings of this kind in London is here described. It appears that the company dined so very late, as at half an hour after eleven in the morning; and that it was the fashion to ride to this polite symposium on a Spanish jennet, a servant running before with his master's cloak. After dinner, they went on horseback to the newest play. The same author in his BELMAN'S NIGHT WALKES
The title page is
"O per se O, or A newe Cryer of Lanthorne and candle light, &c"
Lond. 1612. 4to. Bl. Lett. For J. Busbie. There is a later edition 1620. 4to.
, a lively description of London, almost two centuries ago, gives the following instructions.
"Haunt tavernes, there shalt thou find prodigalls: pay thy two pence to a player in his gallerie, there shalt thou sit by an harlot. At ORDINARIES thou maist dine with silken fooles
CH. ii. Again, in the same writer's
"BELMAN of LONDON Bringing to light the most notorious villanies that are now practised in the kingdom,"
Signat. E. 3.
"At the best ORDINARIES where your only Gallants spend afternoones, &c."
Edit. 1608. 4to. Bl. Lett. Printed at London for N. Butter. This is called a second edition. There was another, 1616, 4to. This piece is called by a cotemporary writer, the most witty, elegant, and eloquent display of the vices of London then extant. W. Fennnor's COMPTOR'S COMMONWEALTH, 1617. 4to. p. 16.
."
In the second satire, he celebrates the wisdom and liberality of our ancestors, in erecting magnificent mansions for the accommodation of scholars, which yet at present have little more use than that of reproaching the rich with their comparative neglect of learning. The verses have much dignity, and are equal to the subject.
To what end did our lavish auncestours
Erect of old those statelie piles of ours?
For thread bare-clerks, and for the ragged muse,
Whom better fit some cotes of sad secluse?
Blush, niggard Ago, be asham'd to see
Those monuments of wiser auncestrie!
And ye, faire heapes, the Muses sacred shrines,
In spight of time, and enuious repines,
Stand still, and flourish till the world's last day,
Vpraiding it with former loue's
Of learning.
decay.
What needes me care for anie bookish skill,
To blot white paper with my restlesse quill:
To pore on painted leaues, or beate my braine
With far-fetch'd thought: or to consvme in uaine
In latter euen, or midst of winter nights,
Ill-smelling oyles, or some still-watching lights, &c.
He concludes his complaint of the general disregard of the literary profession, with a spirited paraphrase of that passage of Persius, in which the philosophy of the profound Arcesilaus and of the
aerumnosi Solones,
is proved to be of so little use and estimation
B. ii. 2. f. 28. In the last line of this satire he says,
Let swinish Grill delight in dunghill clay.
Gryllus is one of Ulysses's companions transformed into a hog by Circe, who refuses to be restored to his human shape. But perhaps the allusion is immediately to Spenser, FAIR. QU. ii. 12. 81.
.
In the third, he laments the lucrative injustice of the law, while ingenuous science is without emolument or reward. The exordium is a fine improvement of his original.
Who doubts, the Laws fell downe from heauen's hight,
Like to some gliding starre in winters night?
Themis, the scribe of god, did long agone
Engrave them deepe in during marble stone:
And cast them downe on this unruly clay,
That men might know to rule and to obey.
The interview between the anxious client and the rapacious lawyer, is drawn with much humour: and shews the authoritative superiority and the mean subordination subsisting between the two characters, at that time.
The crowching client, with low-bended knee,
And manie worships, and faire flatterie,
Tells on his tale as smoothly as him list;
But still the lawyer's eye squints on his fist:
If that seem lined with a larger fee,
"Doubt not the suite, the law is plaine for thee."
Tho
Yet even.
must he buy his vainer hope with price,
Disclout his crownes
Pull them out of his purse.
, and thanke him for advice
B. ii. 3. f. 31.
I cite a couplet from this satire to explain it.
Genus and Species long since barfoote went
Upon their tentoes in wilde wonderment, &c.
This is an allusion to an old distich, made and often quoted in the age of scholastic science.
Dat Galenus opes, dat Justinianus honores,
Sed Genus et Species cogitur ire pedes.
That is, the study of medicine produces riches, and jurisprudence leads to stations and offices of honour: while the professor of logic is poor, and obliged to walk on foot.
.
The fourth displays the difficulties and discouragements of the physician. Here we learn, that the
sick lady
and the
gouty peer
were then topics of the ridicule of the satirist.
The sickly ladie, and the gowtie peere,
Still would I haunt, that loue their life so deere:
Where life is deere, who cares for coyned drosse?
That spent is counted gaine, and spared losse.
He thus laughs at the quintessence of a sublimated mineral elixir.
Each powdred graine ransometh captive kings,
Purchaseth realmes, and life prolonged brings
B. ii. 4. f. 35.
.
Imperial oils, golden cordials, and universal panaceas, are of high antiquity: and perhaps the puffs of quackery were formerly more ostentatious than even at present, before the profession of medicine was freed from the operations of a spurious and superstitious alchemy, and when there were mystics in philosophy as well in religion. Paracelsus was the father of empericism.
From the fifth we learn, that advertisements of a LIVING WANTED were affixed on one of the doors of Saint Paul's cathedral.
Sawst thou ere SIQUIS
SIQUIS was the first word of advertisements, often published on the doors of Saint Paul's. Decker says,
"The first time that you enter into Paules, pass thorough the body of the church like a porter; yet presvme not to fetch so much as one whole turne in the middle ile, nor to cast an eye vpon SIQUIS doore, pasted and plaistered vp with seruingmens supplications, &c."
THE GULS HORNE BOOKE, 1609. p. 21. And in Wroth's EPIGRAMS, 1620. EPIG
. 93.
A mery Greeke set vp a SIQUIS late,
To signifie a stranger come to towne
Who could great noses, &c.
patch'd on Paul's church dore,
To gaine some vacant vicarage before?
The sixth, one of the most perspicuous and easy, perhaps the most humorous, in the whole collection, and which I shall therefore give at length, exhibits the servile condition of a domestic preceptor in the family of an esquire. Several of the satires of this second BOOK, are intended to shew the depressed state of modest and true genius, and the inattention of men of fortune to literary merit.
A gentle squire would gladly entertaine
Into his house some trencher-chapelaine
Or, a table-chaplain. In the same sense me have
trencher-knight,
in LOVES LABOUR LOST.
;
Some willing man, that might instruct his sons,
And that would stand to good conditions.
First, that he lie vpon the truckle-bed,
While his young maister lieth oer his head
This indulgence allowed to the pupil, is the reverse of a rule antiently practiced in our universities. In the Statutes of Corpus Christi college at Oxford, given in 1516, the Scholars are ordered to sleep respectively under the beds of the Fellows, in a truckle-bed, or small bed shifted about upon wheels.
"Sit unum [cubile] altius, et aliud humile et rotale, et in altiori cubet Socius, in altero semper Discipulus."
Cap. xxxvii. Much the same injunction is ordered in the statutes of Magdalen college Oxford, given 1459.
"Sint duo lecti principales, et duo lecti rotales,
Trookyll beddys
vulgariter nuncupati, &c."
Cap. xlv. And in those of Trinity college Oxford, given 1556, where
troccle bed,
the old spelling of the word
truckle bed,
ascertains the etymology from
tro
l
a,
a wheel. Cap. xxvi. In an old Comedy THE RETURN FROM PARNAS
US, acted at Cambridge in 1606, Amoretto says,
"When I was in Cambridge, and lay in a trundle-bed under my tutor, &c."
A. ii. Sc. vi.
:
Second, that he do, upon no default,
Neuer presume to sit aboue the salt
Towards the head of the table was placed a large and lofty piece of plate, the top of which, in a broad cavity, held the salt for the whole company. One of these stately salt-sellars is still preserved, and in use, at Winchester college. With this idea, we must understand the following passage, of a table meanly decked. B. vi. i. f. 83.
Now shalt thou never see the Salt beset
With a bid-bellied gallon flagonet.
In Jonson's CYNTHIA'S REVELLS, acted in 1600, it is said of an affected coxcomb,
"His fashion is, not to take knowledge of him that is beneath him in clothes. He never drinkes
below the salt.
"
A. i. S. ii.
So Dekker, GULS HORNE BOOKE, p. 26.
"At your twelue penny Ordinarie, you may giue any iustice of the peace, or young knight, if he sit but one degree towards the Equinoctiall of the Saltsellar, leaue to pay for the wine, &c."
See more illustrations, in Reed's OLD PLAYS, edit. 1780. vol. iii. 285. In Parrot's SPRINGES FOR WOODCOCKES, 1613, a guest complains of the indignity of being degraded below the salt. Lib. ii. EPIGR. 188.
And swears that he below the Salt was sett.
:
Third, that he neuer change his trencher twise;
Fourth, that he use all common courtesies:
Sit bare at meales, and one half ri
e and wait:
Last, that he never his yong maister beat;
But he must aske his mother to define
How manie jerks she would his breech should line.
All these observ'd, he could contented be,
To give five markes, and winter liverie
B. ii. 6. f. 38.
,
From those who despised learning, he makes a transition to those who abused or degraded it by false pretences. Judicial astrology is the subject of the seventh satire. He supposes that astrology was the daughter of one of the Egyptian midwives, and that having been nursed by Superstition, she assumed the garb of Science.
That now, who pares his nailes, or libs his swine?
But he must first take covnsel of the signe.
Again, of the believer in the stars, he says,
His feare or hope, for plentie or for lack,
Hangs all vpon his new-year's
Almanack.
If chance once in the spring his head should ake,
It was fortold: "thus says mine
Almanack."
The numerous astrological tracts, particularly pieces called PROGNOSTICATIONS, published in the reign of queen Elizabeth, are a proof how strongly the people were infatuated with this sort of divination. One of the most remarkable, was a treatise written in the year 1582, by Richard Harvey, brother to Gabriel Harvey, a learned astrologer of Cambridge, predicting the portentous conjunction of the primary planets, Saturn and Jupiter, which was to happen the next year. It had the immediate effect of throwing the whole kingdom into the most violent consternation. When the fears of the people were over, Nash published a droll account of their opinions and apprehensions while this formidable phenomenon was impending; and Elderton a ballad-maker, and Tarleton the comedian, joined in the laugh. This was the best way of confuting the impertinencies of the science of the stars. True knowledge must have been beginning to dawn, when these profound fooleries became the objects of wit and ridicule
See Nash's APOLOGY OF PEERS PENNILESS, &c. Lond. 1593. 4to. f. 11.
.
SECT. XLV.
THE opening of the first satire of the third Book, which is a contrast of antient parsimony with modern luxury, is so witty, so elegant, and so poetical an enlargement of a shining passage in Juvenal, that the reader will pardon another long quotation.
Time was, and that was term'd the time of gold,
When world and time were young, that now are old:
When quiet Saturne sway'd the mace of lead,
And pride was yet unborne, and yet unbred.
Time was, that whiles the autumne-fall did last,
Our hungrie sires gap'd for the falling mast.
Could no unhusked akorne leaue the tree,
But there was challenge made whose it might be.
And if some nice and liquorous appetite
Desir'd more daintie dish of rare delite,
They scal'd the stored crab with clasped knee,
Till they had sated their delicious ee.
Or search'd the hopefull thicks of hedgy-rows,
For brierie berries, hawes, or sowrer sloes:
Or when they meant to fare the fin'st of all,
They lick'd oake-leaues besprint with hony-fall.
As for the thrise three-angled beech-nut shell,
Or chesnut's armed huske, and hid kernell,
Nor squire durst touch, the lawe would not afford,
Kept for the court, and for the king's owne board.
Their royall plate was clay, or wood, or stone,
The vulgar, saue his hand, else he had none.
Their onlie cellar was the neighbour brooke,
None did for better care, for better looke.
Was then no 'plaining of the brewer's scape
Cheats.
,
Nor greedie vintner mix'd the strained grape.
The king's pavilion was the grassie green,
Vnder safe shelter of the shadie treen.—
But when, by Ceres' huswifrie and paine,
Men learn'd to burie the reuiuing graine,
And father Janus taught the new-found vine
Rise on the elme, with manie a friendly twine:
And base desire bade men to deluen lowe
For needlesse metalls, then gan mischief growe:
Then farewell, fayrest age! &c.—
He then, in the prosecution of a sort of poetical philosophy, which prefers civilized to savage life, wishes for the nakedness or the furs of our simple ancestors, in comparison of the fantastic fopperies of the exotic apparel of his own age.
They, naked went, or clad in ruder hide,
Or homespun russet void of foraine pride.
But thou canst maske in garish gawderie,
To suite a Fool's far-fetched liuerie.
A Frenche head joyn'd to necke Italian,
Thy thighs from Germanie, and breast from Spain:
An Englishman in none, a foole in all,
Many in one, and one in seuerall
B. iii. 1. f. 45.
.
One of the vanities of the age of Elizabeth was the erection of monuments, equally costly and cumbersome, charged with a waste of capricious decorations, and loaded with superfluous and disproportionate sculpture. They succeeded to the rich solemnity of the gothic shrine, which yet, amid a profusion of embellishments, preserved uniform principles of architecture.
In the second satire, our author moralises on these empty memorials, which were alike allotted to illustrious or infamous characters.
Some stately tombe he builds, Egyptian-wise,
REX REGUM written on the pyramis:
Whereas great Arthur lies in ruder oke,
That neuer felt aught but the feller's stroke
He alludes to the discovery of king Arthur's body in Glastonbury abbey. Lately, in digging up a barrow, or tumulus, on the downs near Dorchester, the body of a Danish chief, as it seemed, was found in the hollow trunk of a huge oak for a coffin.
,
Small honour can be got with gaudie graue,
A rotten name from death it cannot saue.
The fairer tombe, the fowler is thy name,
The greater pompe procvring greater shame.
Thy monument make thou thy living deeds,
No other tomb than that true virtue needs!
What, had he nought whereby he might be knowne,
But costly pilements of some curious stone?
The matter nature's, and the workman's frame
His purse's cost:—where then is Osmond's name?
Deservedst thou ill? Well were thy name and thee,
Wert thou inditched in great secrecie;
Whereas no passengers might curse thy dust, &c
B. iii. 2. f. 50.
.
The third is the description of a citizen's feast, to which he was invited,
With hollow words, and ouerly
Slight. Shallow.
request.
But the great profusion of the entertainment was not the effect of liberality, but a hint that no second invitation must be expected. The effort was too great to be repeated. The guest who dined at this table often, had only a single dish
B. iii. 3. f. 52.
.
The fourth is an arraignment of ostentatious piety, and of those who strove to push themselves into notice and esteem by petty pretensions. The illustrations are highly humorous.
Who euer giues a paire of velvet shoes
To th' holy rood
In a gallery over the screen, at entering the choir, was a large crucifix, or rood, with the images of the holy Virgin and saint John. The velvet shoes were for the feet of Christ on the cross, or of one of the attendant figures. A rich lady sometimes bequeathed her wedding-gown, with necklace and ear-rings, to dress up the Virgin Mary. This place was called the Rood-loft.
, or liberally allowes
But a new rope to ring the curfew bell?
But he desires that his great deed may dwell,
Or grauen in the chancell-window glasse,
Or in the lasting tombe of plated brasse.
The same affectation appeared in dress.
Nor can good Myron weare on his left hond,
A signet ring of Bristol-diamond;
But he must cut his gloue to shew his pride,
That his trim jewel might be better spied:
And, that men might some burgesse
Some rich citizen.
him repute,
With sattin sleeves hath
That is,
he
hath, &c.
grac'd his sacke-cloth suit
B. iii. 4. f. 55.
.
The fifth is a droll portrait of the distress of a
lustie courtier,
or fine gentleman, whose periwinkle, or peruke, was suddenly blown off by a boisterous puff of wind while he was making his bows
In a set of articles of enquiry sent to a college in Oxford, about the year 1676, by the visitor bishop Morley, the commissary is ordered diligently to remark, and report, whether any of the senior fellows wore
periwigs.
I will not suppose that bobwigs are here intended. But after such a proscription, who could imagine, that the bushy grizzle-wig should ever have been adopted as a badge of gravity? So arbitrary are ideas of dignity or levity in dress! There is an Epigram in Harrington, written perhaps about 1600,
"Of Galla's goodly periwigge."
B. i. 66. This was undoubtedly false hair. In Hayman's QUODLIBETS or Epigrams, printed 1628, there
is one
"to a Periwiggian."
B. i. 65. p. 10. Again,
"to a certaine Periwiggian."
B. ii. 9. p. 21. Our author mentions a periwigg again, B. v. 2. f. 63.
A golden periwigg on a blackmoor's brow.
.
He lights, and runs and quicklie hath him sped
To ouertake his ouer-running head, &c.
These are our satirist's reflections on this disgraceful accident.
Fie on all courtesie, and unruly windes,
Two only foes that faire disguisement findes!
Strange curse, but fit for such a fickle age,
When scalpes are subject to such vassalage!—
Is't not sweet pride, when men their crownes must shade
With that which jerkes the hams of everie jade
B. iii. 5. f. 57.
!
In the next, is the figure of a famished Gallant, or beau, which is much better drawn than in any of the comedies of those times. His hand is perpetually on the hilt of his rapier. He picks his teeth, but has dined with duke Humphry
That is, he has walked all day in saint Paul's church without a dinner. In the body of old saint Paul's, was a huge and conspicuous monument of sir John Beauchamp, buried in 1358. son of Guy and brother of Thomas, earls of Warwick. This, by a vulgar mistake, was at length called the tomb of Humphry duke of Gloucester, who was really buried at Saint Alban's, where his magnificent shrine now remains. The middle ile of Saint Paul's is called the
Dukes gallery,
in a chapter of the GULS HORNE BOOKE,
"How a gallant should behaue himself in Powles Walkes."
CH. iiii. p. 17. Of the humours of this famous ambulatory, the general rendezvous of lawyers and their clients, pickpookets, cheats, bu
ks, pimps, whores, poets, players, and many others who either for idleness or business found it convenient to frequent the most fashionable crowd in London, a more particular description may be seen, in Dekker's
"DEAD TERME, or Westminsters Complaint for long Vacations and short Termes, under the chapter,
Pawles Steeples complaint.
"
SIGNAT. D. 3. Lond. for John Hodgetts, 1608. 4to. Bl. Lett.
. He professes to keep a plentiful and open house for every
straggling cavaliere,
where the dinners are long and enlivened with music, and where many a gay youth, with a high-plumed hat, chuses to dine, much rather than to pay his shilling. He is so emaciated for want of eating, that his sword-belt hangs loose over his hip, the effect of
hunger and heavy iron.
Yet he is dressed in the height of the fashion,
All trapped in the new-found brauerie.
He pretends to have been at the conquest of Cales, where the nuns worked his bonnet. His hair stands upright in the French style, with one long lock hanging low on his shoulders, which, the satirist adds, puts us in mind of a
native cord,
the truely English rope which he probably will one day wear.
His linen collar labyrinthian set,
Whose thovsand double turnings neuer met:
His sleeves half-hid with elbow-pinionings,
As if he meant to fly with linen wings
Barnaby Rich in his IRISH HUBBUB, printed 1617, thus describes four GALLANTS coming from an Ordinary.
"The third was in a yellow-starched band, that made him looke as if he had been troubled with the yellow iaundis.—They were all four in white bootes and gylt spurres, &c."
Lond. 1617. 4to. p. 36.
.
But when I looke, and cast mine eyes below,
What monster meets mine eyes in human show?
So slender waist, with such an abbot's loyne,
Did neuer sober nature sure conjoyne!
Lik'st a strawe scare-crow in the new-sowne field,
Rear'd on some sticke the tender corne to shield
B. iii. 7. f. 62.
.
In the Prologue to this book, our author strives to obviate the objections of certain critics who falsely and foolishly thought his satires too perspicuous. Nothing could be more absurd, than the notion, that because Persius is obscure, therefore obscurity must be necessarily one of the qualities of satire. If Persius, under the severities of a proscriptive and sanguinary government, was often obliged to conceal his meaning, this was not the case of Hall. But the darkness and difficulties of Persius arise in great measure from his own affectation and false taste. He would have been enigmatical under the mildest government. To be unintelligible can never naturally or properly belong to any species of writing. Hall of himself is certainly obscure: yet he owes some of his obscurity to an imitation of this ideal excellence of the Roman satirists.
The fourth Book breathes a stronger spirit of indignation, and abounds with applications of Juvenal to modern manners, yet with the appearance of original and unborrowed satire.
The first is miscellaneous and excursive, but the subjects often lead to an unbecoming licentiousness of language and images. In the following nervous lines, he has caught and finely heightened the force and manner of his master.
Who list, excuse, when chaster dames can hire
Some snout-fair stripling to their apple squire
Some fair-faced stripling to be their page. Marston has this epithet, Sc. VILLAN. B. i. 3.
Had I some snout-faire brats, they should indure
The newly-found Castilion calenture,
Before some pedant, &c.
In Satires and Epigrams, called THE LETTING OF HUMORS BLOOD IN THE HEAD-VAYNE, 1600, we have
"Some pippin-squire."
EPIGR. 33.
,
Whom staked vp, like to some stallion steed,
They keep with eggs and oysters for the breed.
O Lucine! barren Caia hath an heir,
After her husband's dozen years despair:
And now the bribed midwife sweares apace,
The bastard babe doth beare his father's face.
He thus enhances the value of certain novelties, by declaring them to be,
Worth little less than landing of a whale,
Or Gades spoils
Cadiz was newly taken.
, or a churl's funerale.
The allusion is to Spenser's Talus in the following couplet,
Gird but the cynicke's helmet on his head,
Cares he for Talus, or his flayle of leade?
He adds, that the guilty person, when marked, destroys all distinction, like the cuttle-fish concealed in his own blackness.
Long as the craftie cuttle lieth sure,
In the blacke cloud of his thicke vomiture;
Who list, complaine of wronged faith or fame,
When he may shift it to another's name.
He thus describes the effect of his satire, and the enjoyment of his own success in this species of poetry.
Now see I fire-flakes sparkle from his eyes,
Like to a comet's tayle in th' angrie skies:
His powting cheeks puft vp aboue his brow,
Like a swolne toad touch'd with the spider's blow:
His mouth shrinks side-ways like a scornful playse
A fish. Jonson says in the SILENT WOMAN,
"Of a fool, that would stand thus, with a playse-mouth, &c."
A. i. S. ii. See more instances in OLD PLAYS, vol. iii. p. 395. edit. 1780.
,
To take his tired ear's ingrateful place.—
Nowe laugh I loud, and breake my splene to see,
This pleasing pastime of my poesie:
Much better than a Paris-garden beare
"Then led they cosin [the gull] to the gase of an enterlude, or the beare-bayting of Paris-Garden, or some other place of thieving."
A MANIFEST DETECTION
of the most vyle and detestable vse of
DICE PLAY, &c. No date, Bl. Lett. Signat. D. iiii. Abraham Vele, the printer of this piece, lived before the year 1548. Again, ibid.
"Some ii or iii [pickpockets] hath Paules church on charge, other hath Westminster hawle in terme time, diuerse Chepesyde with the flesh and fishe shambles, some the Borough and Bearebayting, some the court, &c."
Parisgarden was in the borough.
,
Or prating poppet on a theater,
Or Mimo's whistling to his tabouret
Piping or fifing to a tabour. I believe Kempe is here ridiculed.
,
Selling a laughter for a cold meal's meat.
It is in Juvenal's style to make illustrations satirical. They are here very artfully and ingeniously introduced
B. iv. 1. f. 7.
.
The second is the character of an old country squire, who starves himself, to breed his son a lawyer and a gentleman. It appears, that the vanity or luxury of purchasing dainties at an exorbitant price began early.
Let sweet-mouth'd Mercia bid what crowns she please,
For half-red cherries, or greene garden pease,
Or the first artichoak of all the yeare,
To make so lavish cost for little cheare.
When Lollio feasteth in his revelling fit,
Some starved pullen scoures the rusted spit:
For els how should his son maintained be
At inns of court or of the chancery, &c.
The tenants wonder at their landlord's son,
And blesse them
Themselves.
at so sudden coming on!
More than who gives his pence to view some tricke
Of strange Morocco's dumbe arithmeticke
Bankes's horse called Morocco. See Steevens's Note, SHAKESP. ii. 292.
,
Or the young elephant, or two-tayl'd steere,
Or the ridg'd camel, or the fiddling freere
Shewes of those times. He says in this satire,
—'Gin not thy gait
Untill the evening owl, or bloody bat;
Neuer untill the lamps of Paul's been light:
And niggard lanterns shade the moonshine night.
The lamps about Saint Paul's, were at this time the only regular night-illuminations of London. But in an old Collection of JESTS, some Bucks coming drunk from a tavern, and reeling through the city, amused themselves in pulling down the lanterns which hung before the doors of the houses. A grave citizen unexpectedly came out and seized one of them, who said in defence,
"I am only snuffing your candle." JESTS TO MAKE YOU MERIE. Written by T. D. and George Wilkins. Lond. 1607."
4to. p. 6. JEST. 17.
.—
Fools they may feede on words, and liue on ayre
The law is the only way to riches. Fools only will seek preferment in the church, &c.
,
That climbe to honour by the pulpit's stayre;
Sit seuen yeares pining in an anchor's cheyre
In the chair of an anchoret.
,
To win some patched shreds of minivere
The hood of a Master of Arts in the universities. B. iv. 2. f. 19.
He adds,
And seuen more▪ plod at a patron's tayle,
To get some gilded Chapel's cheaper sayle.
I believe the true reading is
gelded
chapel. A benefice robbed of its tythes, &c. Sayle Sale is. So in the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, A. iii. S. 1.
"He hath a proper
gelded
parsonage."
!
He predicts, with no small sagacity, that Lollio's son's distant posterity will rack their rents to a treble proportion,
And hedge in all their neighbours common lands.
Enclosures of waste lands were among the great and national grievances of our author's age
Without attending to this circumstance, we miss the meaning and humour of the following lines, B. v. 1.
Pardon, ye glowing eares! Needes will it out,
Though brazen walls compass'd my tongue about,
As thick as wealthy Scrobio's quickset rowes
In the wide common that he did enclose.
Great part of the third satire of the same book turns on this idea.
. It may be presumed, that the practice was then carried on with the most arbitrary spirit of oppression and monopoly.
The third is on the pride of pedigree. The introduction is from Juvenal's eighth satire; and the substitution of the memorials of English ancestry, such as were then fashionable, in the place of Juvenal's parade of family statues without arms or ears, is remarkably happy. But the humour is half lost, unless by recollecting the Roman original, the reader perceives the unexpected parallel.
Or call some old church-windowe to record
The age of thy fair armes.—
Or find some figures half obliterate,
In rain-beat marble neare to the church-gate,
Upon a crosse-legg'd tombe. What boots it thee,
To shewe the rusted buckle that did tie
The garter of thy greatest grandsire's knee?
What, to reserve their relicks many yeares,
Their siluer spurs, or spils of broken speares?
Or cite old Ocland's verse
See supr. vol. iii. p. 314.
, how they did wield
The wars in Turwin or in Turney field?
Afterwards, some adventurers for raising a fortune are introduced. One trades to Guiana for gold. This is a glance at sir Walter Rawleigh's expedition to that country. Another, with more success, seeks it in the philosopher's stone.
When half his lands are spent in golden smoke,
And now his second hopefull glasse is broke.
But yet, if haply his third fornace hold,
Devoteth all his pots and pans to gold.
Some well-known classical passages are thus happily mixed, modernised, and accommodated to his general purpose.
Was neuer foxe but wily cubs begets;
The bear his fiercenesse to his brood besets:
Nor fearfull hare falls from the lyon's seed,
Nor eagle wont the tender doue to breed.
Crete euer wont the cypresse sad to bear,
Acheron's banks the palish popelar:
The palm doth rifely rise in Jury field
In Judea.
,
And Alpheus' waters nought but oliue yield:
Asopus breeds big bullrushes alone,
Meander heath; peaches by Nilus growne:
An English wolfe, an Irish toad to see,
Were as a chaste man nurs'd in Italy
B. iv. 3. f. 26.
.
In the fourth, these diversions of a delicate youth of fashion and refined manners are mentioned, as opposed to the rougher employments of a military life.
Gallio may pull me roses ere they fall,
Or in his net entrap the tennis-ball;
Or tend his spar-hawke mantling in her mewe,
Or yelping beagles busy heeles pursue:
Or watch a sinking corke vpon the shore
Angle for fish.
,
Or halter finches through a privy doore
A pit-fall. A trap-cage.
;
Or list he spend the time in sportful game, &c.
He adds,
Seest thou the rose-leaues fall ungathered?
Then hye thee, wanton Gallio, to wed.—
Hye thee, and giue the world yet one dwarfe more,
Svch as it got, when thou thyself was bore.
In the contrast between the martial and effeminate life, which includes a general ridicule of the foolish passion which now prevailed, of making it a part of the education of our youth to bear arms in the wars of the Netherlands, are some of Hall's most spirited and nervous verses.
If Martius in boisterous buffs be drest,
Branded with iron plates upon the breast,
And pointed on the shoulders for the nonce
With tags, or shoulder knots.
,
As new come from the Belgian-garrisons;
What should thou need to enuy aught at that,
When as thou smellest like a ciuet-cat?
When as thine oyled locks smooth-platted fall,
Shining like varnish'd pictures on a wall?
When a plum'd fanne
Fans of feathers were now common. See Harrington's EPIGR. i. 70. And Steevens's Shakespeare. i. p. 273.
may shade thy chalked
Painted.
face,
And lawny strips thy naked bosom grace?
If brabbling Makefray, at each fair and 'size,
Assise.
,
Picks quarrels for to shew his valiantize,
Straight pressed for an hvngry Switzer's pay
To thrust his fist to each part of the pray;
And piping hot, puffs toward the pointed
Full of pikes.
plaine,
With a broad scot
A Scotch broad sword.
, or proking spit of Spaine:
Or hoyseth sayle up to a forraine shore,
That he may liue a lawlesse conquerour
Turn pirate.
.
If some such desperate huckster should devise
To rowze thine hare's-heart from her cowardice,
As idle children
It will be like, &c.
, striving to excell
In blowing bladders from an empty shell.
Oh Hercules, how like
Likely.
to prove a man,
That all so rath
Early.
his warlike life began!
Thy mother could for thee thy cradle set
Her husband's rusty iron corselet;
Whose jargling sound might rock her babe to rest,
That neuer plain'd of his vneasy nest:
There did he dreame of dreary wars at hand,
And woke, and fought, and won, ere he could stand
O Hercules, a boy so delicately reared must certainly prove a hero! You, Hercules, was nursed in your father's shield for a cradle, &c. But the tender Gallio, &c.
.
But who hath seene the lambs of Tarentine,
Must guesse what Gallio his manners beene;
All soft, as is the falling thistle-downe,
Soft as the fumy ball
A ball of perfume.
, or morrion's crowne
Morrion is the fool in a play.
.
Now Gallio gins thy youthly heat to raigne,
In every vigorous limb, and swelling vaine:
Time bids thee raise thine headstrong thoughts on high
To valour, and adventurous chivalry.
Pawne thou no gloue
He says with a sneer,
Do not play with the character of a soldier. Be not contented only to shew your courage in tilting. But enter into real service, &c.
for challenge of the deede, &c
B. iv. 4. In a couplet of this satire, he alludes to the SCHOLA SALERNITANA, an old medical system in rhyming verse, which chiesly describes the qualities of diet.
Tho neuer haue I Salerne rimes profest,
To be some lady's trencher-critick guest.
There is much humour in
trencher-critick.
Collingborn, mentioned in the beginning of this satire, is the same whose Legend is in the MIRROUR OF MAGISTRATES, and who was hanged for a distich on Catesby, Ratcliff, Lord Lovel, and king Richard the third, about the year 1484. See MIRR. MAG. p. 455. edit. 1610. 4to. Our author says,
Or lucklesse Collingbourne feeding of the crowes.
That is, he was food for the crows when on the gallows. At the end, is the first use I have seen, of a witty apothegmatical comparison, of a libidinous old man.
The maidens mocke, and call him withered leeke,
That with a greene tayle has an hoary head.
.
The fifth, the most obscure of any, exhibits the extremes of prodigality and avarice, and affords the first instance I remember to have seen, of nominal initials with dashes. Yet in his POSTSCRIPT, he professes to have avoided all personal applications
B. iv. 6. Collybist, here used, means a rent or tax gatherer.
, nummularius.
.
In the sixth, from Juvenal's position that every man is naturally discontented, and wishes to change his proper condition and character, he ingeniously takes occasion to expose some of the new fashions and affectations.
Out from the Gades to the eastern morne,
Not one but holds his native state forlorne.
When comely striplings wish it were their chance,
For Cenis' distaffe to exchange their lance;
And weare curl'd periwigs, and chalk their face,
And still are poring on their pocket-glasse;
Tyr'd
Attir'd. Dressed, adorned.
with pinn'd ruffs, and fans, and partlet strips,
And buskes and verdingales about their hips:
And tread on corked stilts a prisoner's pace.
Beside what is here said, we have before seen, that perukes were now among the novelties in dress. From what follows it appears that coaches were now in common use
Of the rapid encrease of the number of coaches, but more particularly of Hackney-coaches, we have a curious proof in
A pleasant Dispute between Coach and Sedan,
Lond. 1636. 4to.
"The most eminent places for stoppage are Pawles-gate into Cheapside, Ludgate and Ludgatehill, especially when the Play is done at the Friers: then Holborne Conduit, and Holborne-Bridge, is villainously pestered with them, Hosier-Lane, Smithfield, and Cow-Lane, sending all about their new or old mended coaches. Then about the Stockes, and Poultrie, Temple-Barre, Fetter-lane, and Shoe-Lane next to Fleetstreete. But to see their multitude, either when there is a Masque at Whitehall, or a lord Mayor's Feast, or a New Play at some of the playhouses, you would admire to see them how close they stand together, like mutton-pies in a cook's oven, &c."
Signat. F. Marston, in 1598, speaks of the
joulting Coach
of a Messalina. Sc. VILLAN. B. i. 3. And in Marston's Postscript to PIGMALION, 1598, we are to understand a coach, where he says,
—Run as sweet
As doth a tumbrell through the paved street.
In CYNTHIA'S REVELS, 1600, a spendthrift is introduced, who among other polite extravagancies, is
"able to maintaine a ladie in her two carroches a day."
A. iv. S. ii. However, in the old comedy of RAMALLEY, or MERRY TRICKS, first printed in 1611, a
coach
and a
caroche
seem different vehicles, A. iv. S. ii.
In horslitters, [in] coaches or caroaches.
Unless the poet means a synonime for
coach.
In some old account I have seen of queen Elizabeth's progress to Cambridge, in 1564, it is said, that lord Leicester went in a coach, because he had
hurt his leg.
In a comedy, so late as the reign of Charles the first, among many studied wonders of fictitious and hyperbolical luxury, a lover promises his lady that she shall ride in a coach to the next door. Cartwright's LOVES CONVERT. A. ii. S. vi. Lond. 1651. WORKS, p. 125.
—Thou shalt
Take coach to the next door, and as it were
An Expedition not a Visit, be
Bound
for an house not ten strides off, still carry'd
Aloof in indignation of the earth.
Stowe says,
"In the yeare 1564, Guylliam Boonen, a dutchman, became the Queene's coachmanne, and was the first that brought the vse of coaches into England. And after a while, diuers great ladies, with as great iealousie of the queene's displeasure, made them coaches, and rid in them vp and downe the countries to the great admiration of all the behoulders, but then by little and little they grew vsuall among the nobilitie, and others of sort, and within twenty yeares became a great trade of coachmaking. And about that time began long wagons to come in vse, such as now come to London, from Caunterbury, Norwich, Ipswich, Glocester, &c. with passengers and commodities. Lastly, euen at this time, 1605, began the ordinary vse of caroaches."
Edit. fol. 1615. p. 867. col. 2.
From a comparison of the former and latter part of the context, it will perhaps appear that
Coaches
and
Caroaches
were the same.
.
Is't not a shame, to see each homely groome
Sit perched in an idle chariot-roome?
The rustic wishing to turn soldier, is pictured in these lively and poetical colours.
The sturdy ploughman doth the soldier see
All scarfed with pied colours to the knee,
Whom Indian pillage hath made fortunate;
And nowe he gins to loathe his former state:
Nowe doth he inly scorne his Kendal-greene
This sort of stuff is mentioned in a statute of Richard the second, an. 12. A. D. 1389.
,
And his patch'd cockers nowe despised beene:
Nor list he nowe go whistling to the carre,
But sells his teeme, and settleth to the warre.
O warre, to them that neuer try'd thee sweete!
When his dead mate falls groveling at his feete:
And angry bullets whistlen at his eare,
And his dim eyes see nought but death and dreare!
Another, fired with the flattering idea of seeing his name in print, abandons his occupation, and turns poet.
Some drunken rimer thinks his time well spent,
If he can liue to see his name in print;
Who when he once is fleshed to the presse,
And sees his handsell have such faire successe,
Sung to the wheele, and sung vnto the payle
By the knife-grinder and the milkmaid.
,
He sends forth thraves
A thrave of straw is a bundle of straw, of a certain quantity, in the midland counties.
of ballads to the sale
These lines seem to be levelled at William Elderton, a celebrated drunken ballad-writer. Stowe says, that he was an attorney of the Sheriff's court in the city of London about the year 1570, and quotes some verses which he wrote about that time, on the erection of the new portico with images, at Guildhall. SURV. LOND. edit. 1599. p. 217. 4to. He has two epitaphs in Camden's REMAINS, edit. 1674. p. 533. seq. Hervey in his FOUR LETTERS, printed in 1592, mentions him with Greene.
"If [Spenser's] MOTHER HUBBARD, in the vaine of Chawcer, happen to tell one Canicular tale, Father Elderton and his son Greene, in the vaine of Skelton or Skoggin, will counterfeit an hundred dogged fables, libels, &c."
p. 7. Nash, in his APOLOGY OF PIERS PENNILESSE, says, that
"Tarleton at the theater made jests of him [Hervey,] and W. Elderton consumed his ale-crammed nose to nothing, in bear-baiting him with whole bundles of ballads."
Signat. E. edit. 1593. 4to. And Harvey, ubi supr. p. 34. I have seen
"Elderton's Solace in time of his sickness containing sundrie sonnets upon many pithie parables,"
entered to R. Jones, Sept. 25. 1578. REGISTR. STATION. B. f. 152. a. Also
"A ballad against marriage, by William Elderton balladmaker."
For T. Colwell, 1575. 12mo. A Ballad on the Earthquake by Elderton, beginning
Quake, Quake, Quake,
is entered to R. Jones, Apr. 25. 1579. REGISTR. STATION. B. f. 168. a. In 1561, are entered to H. Syngleton,
"Elderton's Jestes with his mery toyes."
REGISTR. STATION. A. f. 74. a. Again, in 1562,
"Elderton's Parrat answered."
Ibid. f. 84. a. Again, a poem as I suppose, in 1570,
"Elderton's ill fortune."
ibid. f. 204. a. Harvey says, that Elderton and Greene were
"the ringleaders of the riming and scribbling crew."
LETT. ubi supr. p. 6. Many more of his pieces might be recited.
.
Having traced various scenes of dissatisfaction, and the desultory pursuits of the world, he comes home to himself, and concludes, that real happiness is only to be found in the academic life. This was a natural conclusion from one who had experienced no other situation
In this Satire, among the lying narratives of travellers, our author, with Mandeville and others, mentions the SPANISH DECADS. It is an old black-letter quarto, a translation from the Spanish into English, about 1590. In the old anonymous play of LINGUA, 1607, Mendacio says,
"Sir John Mandeviles trauells, and great part of the DECADS, were of my doing."
A. ii. S. i.
.
Mongst all these stirs of discontented strife,
Oh, let me lead an academick life!
To know much, and to think we nothing knowe,
Nothing to haue, yet think we haue enowe:
In skill to want, and wanting seeke for more;
In weale nor want, nor wish for greater store
B. iv. 6.
.
The last of this Book, is a satire on the pageantries of the papal chair, and the superstitious practices of popery, with which it is easy to make sport. But our author has done this, by an uncommon quickness of allusion, poignancy of ridicule, and fertility of burlesque invention. Were Juvenal to appear at Rome, he says,
How his enraged ghost would stamp and stare,
That Cesar's throne is turn'd to Peter's chaire:
To see an old shorne lozel perched high,
Crouching beneath a golden canopie!—
And, for the lordly Fasces borne of old,
To see two quiet crossed keyes of gold!—
But that he most would gaze, and wonder at,
Is, th' horned mitre, and the bloody hat
Cardinal's scarlet hat.
;
The crooked staffe
Bishop's crosier.
, the coule's strange form and store
And multitude of them.
,
Saue that he saw the same in hell before.
The following ludicrous ideas are annexed to the exclusive appropriation of the eucharistic wine to the priest in the mass.
The whiles the liquorous priest spits every trice,
With longing for his morning sacrifice:
Which he reares vp quite perpendiculare,
That the mid church doth spight the chancel's fare
B. iv. 7
.
But this sort of ridicule is improper and dangerous. It has a tendency, even without an entire parity of circumstances, to burlesque the celebration of this aweful solemnity in the reformed church. In laughing at false religion, we may sometimes hurt the true. Though the rites of the papistic eucharist are erroneous and absurd, yet great part of the ceremony, and above all the radical idea, belong also to the protestant communion.
SECT. XLVI.
THE argument of the first satire of the fifth Book, is the oppressive exaction of landlords, the consequence of the growing decrease of the value of money. One of these had perhaps a poor grandsire, who grew rich by availing himself of the general rapine at the dissolution of the monasteries. There is great pleasantry in one of the lines, that he
Begg'd a cast abbey in the church's wayne.
In the mean time, the old patrimonial mansion is desolated; and even the parish-church unroofed and dilapidated, through the poverty of the inhabitants, and neglect or avarice of the patron.
Would it not vex thee, where thy sires did keep
Live, inhabit.
,
To see the dunged folds of dag-tayl'd sheep?
And ruin'd house where holy things were said,
Whose free-stone walls the thatched roofe vpbraid;
Whose shrill saints-bell hangs on his lovery,
While the rest are damned to the plumbery
The bells were all sold, and melted down; except that for necessary use the Saints-bell, or
sanctus-bell,
was only suffered to remain within its
lovery,
that is louver, or turret, usually placed between the chancel and body of the church. Marston has
"pitch-black loueries."
SC. VILLAN. B. ii. 5.
:
Yet pure devotion lets the steeple stand,
And idle battlements on either hand, &c
Just to keep up the appearance of a church.
.
By an enumeration of real circumstances, he gives us the following lively draught of the miserable tenement, yet ample services, of a poor copyholder.
Of one bay's breadth, god wot, a silly cote,
Whose thatched spars are furr'd with sluttish soote
A whole inch thick, shining like black-moor's brows,
Through smoke that downe the headlesse barrel blows.
At his bed's feete feeden his stalled teame,
His swine beneath, his pullen oer the beame.
A starued tenement, such as I guesse
Stands straggling on the wastes of Holdernesse:
Or such as shivers on a Peake hill side, &c.—
Yet must he haunt his greedy landlord's hall
With often presents at each festivall:
With crammed capons euerie New-yeare's morne,
Or with greene cheeses when his sheepe are shorne:
Or many maunds-full
Maund is Basket. Hence MAUNDAYThursday, the Thursday in Passion-week, when the king with his own hands distributes a large portion of alms, &c. MAUNDAY is DIES SPORTULAE. Maund occurs again, B. iv. 2.
With a
manud
charg'd with houshold marchandize.
In the WHIPPINGE OF THE SATYRE, 1601. Signat. C. 4.
Whole MAUNDS and
baskets
ful of fine sweet praise.
of his mellow fruite, &c.
The lord's acceptance of these presents is touched with much humour.
The smiling landlord shewes a sunshine face,
Feigning that he will grant him further grace;
And leers like Esop's foxe vpon the crane,
Whose neck he craves for his chirurgian
B. v.
. f. 58.
.
In the second
In this Satire there is an allusion to an elegant fiction in Chaucer, v. 5. f. 61.
Certes if Pity dyed at Chaucer's date.
Chaucer places the sepulchre of PITY in the COURT OF LOVE. See COURT OF L. v. 700.
—A tender creature
Is shrinid there, and PITY is her name:
She saw an Egle wreke him on a Flie,
And plucke his wing, and eke him in his game,
And tendir harte of that hath made her die.
This thought is borrowed by Fenton, in his MARIAMNE.
, he reprehends the incongruity of splendid edifices and worthless inhabitants.
Like the vaine bubble of Iberian pride,
That overcroweth all the world beside
The Escurial in Spain.
;
Which rear'd to raise the crazy monarch's fame,
Striues for a court and for a college name:
Yet nought within but lousy coules doth hold,
Like a scabb'd cuckow in a cage of gold.—
When
As when.
Maevio's first page of his poesy
Nail'd to a hundred postes for nouelty,
With his big title, an Italian mot i
In this age, the three modern languages were studied to affectation. In the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, above quoted, a fashionable fop tells his Page,
"Sirrah, boy, remember me when I come in Paul's Church-yard, to buy a Ronsard and Dubartas in French, an Aretin
in Italian, and our hardest writers in Spanish, &c."
A. ii. Sc. iii.
,
Layes siege unto the backward buyer's grot, &c.
He then beautifully drawes, and with a selection of the most picturesque natural circumstances, the inhospitality or rather desertion of an old magnificent rural mansion.
Beat the broad gates, a goodly hollow sound
With double echoes doth againe rebound;
But not a dog doth bark to welcome thee,
Nor churlish porter canst thou chafing see:
All dumb and silent, like the dead of night,
Or dwelling of some sleepy Sybarite!
The marble pavement hid with desart weed,
With house-leek, thistle, dock, and hemlock-seed.—
Look to the towered chimnies, which should be
The wind-pipes of good hospitalitie:—
Lo, there th' unthankful swallow takes her rest,
And fills the tunnell with her circled nest
The motto on the front of the house ΟΥΔΕΙΣ ΕΙΣΙΤΩ, which he calls a fragment of Plato's poetry, is a humorous alteration of Plato's ΟΥΔΕΙΣ ΑΚΑΘΑΡΤΟΣ ΕΙΣΙΤΩ.
!
Afterwards, the figure of FAMINE is thus imagined.
Grim FAMINE sits in their fore-pined face,
All full of angles of vnequal space,
Like to the plane of many-sided squares
That wont be drawne out by geometars
B. v. 2.
.
In the third, a satire is compared to the porcupine.
The satire should be like the porcupine,
That shoots sharp quills out in each angry line
B. v. 3.
.
This ingenious thought, though founded on a vulgar errour, has been copied, among other passages, by Oldham. Of a true writer of satire, he says,
He'd shoot his quills just like a porcupine,
At view, and make them stab in every line
APOLOGY for the foregoing ODE, &c. WORKS, vol. i. p. 97. edit. 1722. 12mo.
.
In the fourth and last of this Book, he enumerates the extravagancies of a married spendthrift, a farmer's heir, of twenty pounds a year. He rides with
two liveries,
and keeps a pack of hounds.
But whiles ten pound goes to his wife's new gowne,
Not little less can serue to suite his owne:
While one piece pays her idle waiting-man,
Or buys an hood, or siluer-handled fan:
Or hires a Friezeland trotter, halfe yard deepe,
To drag his tumbrell through the staring Cheape
B. v. 4.
.
The last Book consisting of one long satire only, is a sort of epilogue to the whole, and contains a humorous ironical description of the effect of his satires, and a recapitulatory view of many of the characters and foibles which he had before delineated. But the scribblers seem to have the chief share. The character of Labeo, already repeatedly mentioned, who was some cotemporary poet, a constant censurer of our author, and who from pastoral proceeded to heroic poetry, is here more distinctly represented. He was a writer who affected compound epithets, which sir Philip Sydney had imported from France, and first used in his ARCADIA
We have our author's opinion of Skelton in these lines of this satire. f. 83.
Well might these checks have fitted former times,
And shoulder'd angry Skelton's breathelesse rimes.
. The character in many respects suits Chapman, though I do not recollect that he wrote any pastorals.
That Labeo reades right, who can deny,
The true straines of heroick poesy;
For he can tell how fury reft his sense,
And Phebus fill'd him with intelligence:
He can implore the heathen deities,
To guide his bold and busy enterprise:
Or filch whole pages at a clap for need,
From honest Petrarch, clad in English weed;
While big BUT OH'S each stanza can begin,
Whose trunk and taile sluttish and heartlesse been:
He knowes the grace of that new elegance
Which sweet Philisides fetch'd late from France,
That well beseem'd his high-stil'd ARCADY,
Though others marre it with much liberty,
In epithets to joine two words in one,
Forsooth, for adjectives can't stand alone.
The arts of composition must have been much practiced, and a knowledge of critical niceties widely diffused, when observations of this kind could be written. He proceeds to remark, it was now customary for every poet, before he attempted the dignity of heroic verse, to try his strength by writing pastorals
Though these lines bear a general sense, yet at the same time they seem to be connected with the character of Labeo, by which they are introduced. By the
Carmelite,
a pastoral writer ranked with Theocritus and Virgil, he means Mantuan.
.
But ere his Muse her weapon learn to wield,
Or dance a sober Pirrhicke
The Pyrrhic dance, performed in armour.
in the field;—
The sheepe-cote first hath beene her nursery,
Where she hath worne her idle infancy;
And in high startups walk'd the pastur'd plaines,
To tend her tasked herd that there remains;
And winded still a pipe of oate or breare, &c.
Poems on petty subjects or occasions, on the death of a favourite bird or dog, seem to have been as common in our author's age, as at present. He says,
Should Bandell's throstle die without a song,
Or Adamans my dog be laid along
Downe in some ditch, without his exequies
In pursuance of the argument, he adds,
Folly itselfe or Boldnesse may be prais'd.
An allusion to Erasmus's MORIAE ENCOMIUM, and the ENCOMIUM CALVITIEI, written at the restoration of learning. Cardan also wrote an encomium on Nero, the Gout, &c.
,
Or epitaphs or mournful elegies
In this Satire, Tarleton is praised as a poet, who is most commonly considered only as a comedian. Meres commends him for his facility in extemporancous versification. WITS TR. f. 286.
I shall here throw together a few notices of Tarleton's poetry.
"A new booke on English verse, entitled, TARLTON'S TOYES,"
was entered Dec. 10, 1576, to R. Jones. REGISTR. STATION. B. f. 136. b.
"See Heruey's FOURE LETTERS, 1592. p. 34. Tarleton's devise uppon the unlooked for great snowe,"
is entered, in 1578. Ibid. f. 156. b.—A ballad called TARLETON'S FAREWELL, is entered in 1588. Ibid. f. 2
3. a.—
"Tarleton's repentance just before his death,"
is entered in 1589. Ibid. f. 249. a. The next year, viz. 1590, Aug. 20,
"A pleasant dittye dialogue-wise betweene Tarleton's ghost and Robyn Goodfellowe,"
is entered to H. Carre. Ibid. f. 263. a. There is a transferred copy of TARLTON'S JESTS, I suppose TARLTON'S TOYES, in 1607. REGISTR. C. f. 179. b. Many other pieces might be recited. [See supr. iii. 481.] See more of Tarleton, in SUPPLEMENT to SHAKESPEARE, i. pp. 55. 58. 59. And OLD PLAYS, edit. 1778. PREFACE, p. lxii.
To what is there collected concerning Tarleton as a player, it may be added, that his ghost is one of the speakers, in that character, in Chettle's KIND-HARTE'S DREAME, printed about 1593. Without date, quarto. Signat. E. 3. And that in the Preface, he appears to have been also a musician.
"Tarlton with his Tabe
taking two or three leaden friskes, &c."
Most of our old comedians professed every part of the histrionic science, and were occasionally fidlers, dancers, and gesticulators. Dekker says, Tarleton, Kempe, nor Singer,
"euer plaid the Clowne more naturally."
Dekker's GULS HORNE BOOKE, 1609, p. 3. One or two of Tarleton's Jests are mentioned in
"THE DISCOUERIE OF THE KNIGHTS OF THE POSTE, &c."
By S. S. Lond. Impr. by G. S. 1597. 4to. Bl. Lett. In Fitz-Geoffrey's CENOTAPHIA, annexed to his AFFANIAE, 1601, there is a panegyric on Tarleton. Signat. N. 2. Tarleton and Greene are often mentioned as associates in Harvey's FOUR LETTERS, 1592.
?
In the old comedy, the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, we are told of a coxcomb who could bear no poetry
"but flyblown sonnets of his mistress, and her loving pretty creatures her monkey and her parrot
A. 3. Sc. iv.
."
The following exquisite couplet exhibits our satirist in another and a more delicate species of poetry.
Her lids like Cupid's bow-case, where he hides
The weapons that do wound the wanton-ey'd
B. vi. Pontan here mentioned, I presume, is Jovinianus Pontanus, an elegant Latin amatorial and pastoral poet of Italy, at the revival of learning.
.
One is surprised to recollect, that these satires are the production of a young man of twenty three. They rather seem the work of an experienced master, of long observation, of study and practice in composition.
They are recited among the best performances of the kind, and with applause, by Francis Meres, a cotemporary critic, who wrote in 1598
WIT
TREAS. f. 282. It is extraordinary, that they should not have afforded any
choice flowers
to ENGLAND'S PARNASSUS, printed in 1600.
. But whatever fame they had acquired, it soon received a check, which was never recovered. They were condemned to the flames, as licentious and immoral, by an order of bishop Bancroft in 1599. And this is obviously the chief reason why they are not named by our author, in the SPECIALITIES of his Life, written by himself after his preferment to a bishoprick
SHAKING OF THE OLIVE, or his Remaining Works, 1660. 4to. Nor are they here inserted.
. They were, however, admired and imitated by Oldham. And Pope, who modernised Donne, is said to have wished he had seen Hall's satires sooner. But had Pope undertaken to modernise Hall, he must have adopted, because he could not have improved, many of his lines. Hall is too finished and smooth for such an operation. Donne, though he lived so many years later, was susceptible of modern refinement, and his asperities were such as wanted and would bear the chissel.
I was informed, by the late learned bishop of Glocester, that in a copy of Hall's Satires in Pope's library, the whole first satire of the sixth book was corrected in the margin, or interlined, in Pope's own hadn; and that Pope had written at the head of that satire, OPTIMA SATIRA.
Milton who had a controversy with Hall, as I have observed, in a remonstrance called an APOLOGY FOR SMECTYMNUUS, published in 1641, rather unsuitably and disingenuously goes out of his way, to attack these satires, a juvenile effort of his dignified adversary, and under every consideration alien to the dispute. Milton's strictures are more sarcastic than critical; yet they deserve to be cited, more especially as they present a striking specimen of those aukward attempts at humour and raillery, which disgrace his prose-works.
"Lighting upon this title of TOOTHLESS SATYRS, I will not conceal ye what I thought, readers, that sure this must be some sucking satyr, who might have done better to have used his coral, and made an end of breeding ere he took upon him to wield a satyr's whip. But when I heard him talk of
scouring the shields of elvish knights
A misquoted line in the DEFIANCE TO ENVY, prefixed to the Satires. I will give the whole passage, which is a compliment to Spenser, and shews how happily Hall would have succeeded in the majestic march of the long stanza.
Or scoure the rusted swordes of Elvish knights,
Bathed in pagan blood: or sheathe them new
In mistie moral types: or tell their fights,
Who mighty giants, or who monsters slew:
And by some strange inchanted speare and shield,
Vanquish'd their foe, and won the doubtful field.
May be she might, in stately stanzas frame
Stories of ladies, and aduenturous knights:
To raise her silent and inglorious name
Vnto a reachlesse pitch of praise's hight:
And somewhat say, as more vnworthy done
That is,
have
done.
,
Worthy of brasse, and hoary marble stone.
, do not blame me if I changed my thought, and concluded him some desperate cutler. But why his
scornful Muse could never abide with tragick shoes her ancles for to hide
B. i. 1.
, the pace of the verse told me, that her mawkin knuckles were never shapen to that royal buskin. And turning by chance to the sixth [seventh] Satyr of his second Book, I was confirmed: where having begun loftily in
heaven's universal alphabet,
he falls down to that wretched poorness and frigidity as to talk of
Bridge-street in heaven,
and the
ostler of heaven
Hall supposes, that the twelve signs of the zodiac are twelve inns, in the highstreet of heaven,
—With twelve fayre signes
Euer well tended by our star-divines.
Of the astrologers, who give their attendance, some are ostlers, others chamberlaines, &c. The zodiacal Sign AQUARIUS, he supposes to be in the BRIDGE-STREET of heaven. He alludes to Bridge-street at Cambridge, and the signs are of inns at Cambridge.
. And there wanting other matter to catch him a heat, (for certain he was on the frozen zone miserably benummed,) with thoughts lower than any beadle's, betakes him to whip the sign-posts of Cambridge alehouses, the ordinary subject of freshmens tales, and in a strain as pitiful. Which, for him who would be counted the FIRST ENGLISH SATYRIST, to abase himselfe to, who might have learned better among the Latin and Italian Satyrists, and in our own tongue from the VISION AND CREEDE OF PIERCE PLOWMAN, besides others before him, manifested a presumptuous undertaking with weak and unexamined shoulders. For a Satyr is as it were born out of a Tragedy, so ought to resemble his parentage, to strike high, and adventure dangerously at the most eminent vices among the greatest persons, and not to creep into every blind taphouse that fears a constable more than a satyr. But that such a poem should be TOOTHLESS, I still affirm it to be a bull, taking away the essence of that which it calls itself. For if it bite neither the persons nor the vices, how is it a satyr? And if it bite either, how is it toothless? So that TOOTHLESS SATYRS, are as much as if he had said TOOTHLESS TEETH, &c
APOLOGY FOR SMECTYMNUUS, Milton's Prose-works, vol. i. p. 186. edit. Amst. 1698. fol. See also p. 185. 187. 191.
."
With Hall's SATIRES should be ranked his MUNDUS ALTER ET IDEM, an ingenious satirical fiction in prose, where under a pretended description of the TERRA AUSTRALIS, he forms a pleasant invective against the characteristic vices of various nations, and is remarkably severe on the church of Rome. This piece was written about the year 1600, before he had quitted the classics for the fathers, and published some years afterwards, against his consent. Under the same class should also be mentioned his CHARACTERISMES OF VERTUES, a set of sensible and lively moral essays, which contain traces of the satires
WORKS ut supr. p. 171. Under the Character of the HYPOCRITE, he says,
"When a rimer reads his poeme to him, he begs a copie, and perswades the presse, &c."
p 187. Of the VAINEGLORIOUS.
"He sweares bigge at an Ordinary, and talkes of the Court with a sharp voice.—He calls for pheasants at a common inne.—If he haue bestowed but a little summe in the glazing, pauing, parieting, of gods house, you shall find it in the church-window."
[See SAT. B. iv. 3.]
"His talke is, how many mourners he has furnished with gownes at his father's funerals, what exploits he did at Cales and Newport, &c."
p. 194, 195. Of the BUSIE BODIE.
"If he see but two men talke and reade a letter in the streete, he runnes to them and askes if he may not be partner of that secret relation: and if they deny it, he offers to tell, since he cannot heare, wonders: and then falls vpon the report of the Scottish Mine, or of the great fish taken vp at Linne, or of the freezing of the Thames, &c."
p. 188. Of the SUPERSTITIOUS.
"He never goes without an Erra Pater in his pocket.—Every lanterne is a ghost, and every noise is of chaines, &c."
p. 189. These pieces were written after the Gunpowder-plot, for it is mentioned, p. 196.
.
I take the opportunity of observing here, that among Hall's prose-works are some metaphrastic versions in metre of a few of David's Psalms
WORK
, ut supr. p. 151. In the DEDICATION he says,
"Indeed my Poetry was long sithence out of date, and yelded her place to grauer studies, &c."
In his EPISTLES he speaks of this unfinished undertaking.
"Many great wits haue vndertaken this task.—Among the rest, were those two rare spirits of the Sidnyes; to whom poesie was as natvrall as it is affected of others: and our worthy friend Mr. Sylvester hath shewed me how happily he hath sometimes turned from his Bartas to the sweet singer of Israel.—There is none of all my labours so open to all censures. Perhaps some think the verse harsh, whose nice eare regardeth roundnesse more than sense. I embrace smoothnesse, but affect it not."
DEC. ii. Ep. v. p. 302. 303. ut supr.
, and three anthems or hymns written for the use of his cathedral. Hall, in his Satires, had condemned this sort of poetry.
An able inquirer into the literature of this period has affirmed, that Hall's Epistles, written before the year 1613
See WORKS, ut supr. p. 275.
, are the first example of epistolary composition which England had seen.
"Bishop Hall, he says, was not only our first satirist, but was the first who brought epistolary writing to the view of the public: which was common in that age to other parts of Europe, but not practiced in England till he published his own Epistles
See Whalley's INQUIRY INTO THE LEARNING OF SHAKESPEARE, p. 41.
."
And Hall himself in the Dedication of his Epistles to Prince Henry observes,
"Your grace shall herein perceiue a new fashion of discourse by EPISTLES, new to our language, vsuall to others: and, as nouelty is neuer without plea of vse, more free, more familiar
WORKS, ut supr. p. 172. The reader of Hall's SATIRES is referred to DEC. vi. Epist. vi. p. 394.
."
The first of our countrymen, however, who published a set of his own Letters, though not in English, was Roger Ascham, who flourished about the time of the Reformation; and when that mode of writing had been cultivated by the best scholars in various parts of Europe, was celebrated for the terseness of his epistolary style. I believe the second published correspondence of this kind, and in our own language, at least of any importance after Hall, will be found to be EPISTOLAE HOELIANAE, or the Letters of James Howell, a great traveller, an intimate friend of Jonson, and the first who bore the office of the royal historiographer, which discover a variety of literature, and abound with much entertaining and useful information
"EPISTOLAE HOELIANAE, Familiar Letters, Domestic and Foreign, divided into sundry sections partly historical, political, and philosophical."
Lond. 1645. 4to. They had five editions from 1645, to 1673, inclusive. A third and fourth volume was added to the last impression.
I must not dismiss our satirist without observing, that Fuller has preserved a witty encomiastic English epigram by Hall, written at Cambridge, on Greenham's Book of the SABBATH, before the year 1592. CHURCHHISTORY, B. ix. CENT. xvi. §. vii. pag. 220. edit. 1655. fol. I find it also prefixed to Greenham's WORKS, in folio, 1601.
.
SECT. XLVII.
IN the same year, 1598, soon after the appearance of Hall's Satires, John Marston, probably educated at Cambridge, a dramatic writer who rose above mediocrity, and the friend and coadjutor of Jonson, published
"The metamorphosis of Pigmalion's image. And Certaine Satyres. By John Marston. At London, printed for Edmond Matts
The Colophon at the end of the book, is
"At London printed by James Roberts, 1598."
, and are to be sold at the signe of the hand and plough in Fleetstreete, 1598
In duodecimo. With vignettes. Pages 82. They are entered to Matts, May 27, 1598. REGISTR. STATION. C. f. 36. b. Hall's Satires are entered only the thirtieth day of March preceding.
."
I have nothing to do with PIGMALIONS IMAGE, one of Ovid's transformations heightened with much paraphrastic obscenity
Of this piece I shall say little more, than that it is thought by some, notwithstanding the title-page just produced, not to be Marston's. But in his SCOURGE OF VILLANIE he cites it as his own. B. ii. 6. Again, B. iii. 10. And in ENGLAND'S PARNASSUS, published in 1600, part of the dedication to OPINION is quoted, with the name J. Marston, p. 221. He seems to have written it in ridicule of Shakespeare's VENUS AND ADONIS. He offers this apology, B. i. 6. (ut supr.)
—Know, I wrot
Those idle rimes, to note the odious spot
And blemish, that deformes the lineaments
Of Moderne Poesie's habiliments.
Oh, that the beauties of inuention
For want of iudgement's disposition,
Should all be spoil'd! O, that such treasurie,
Such straines of well-conceited poesie,
Should moulded be in such a shapelesse forme
That want of art should make such wit a scorne!
The author of the Satires appears in stanzas, x. xiv. xix. I have thought that this poem suggested to Shakespeare what Lucio says in MEASURE FOR MEASURE. A. iii. S. ii. Vol. ii. p. 92. [See supr. vol. iii. 417.]
. The Satires here specified are only four in number. In Charles Fitzgeoffry's AFFANIAE, a set of Latin epigrams, printed at Oxford in 1601, he is not inelegantly complimented as the second English Satirist, or rather as dividing the palm of priority and excellence in English satire with Hall.
Ad JOHANNEM MARSTONIUM.
Gloria Marstoni satyrarum proxima primae,
Primaque, fas primas si numerare duas:
Sin primam duplicare nefas, tu gloria saltem
Marstoni primae proxima semper eris.
Nec te poeniteat stationis, Jane: secundus,
Cum duo sunt tantum, est neuter, et ambo pares
Lib. ii. Sig. F. 4. In Davies's SCOURGE OF FOLLY, there is an Epigram to
"The acute Mr. John Marston,"
on his comedy of the MALECONTENT. p. 105.
.
In general it is not easy to give a specimen of Marston's satires, as his strongest lines are either openly vitiated with gross expression, or pervaded with a hidden vain of impure sentiment. The following humorous portrait of a sick inamorato is in his best, at least in his chastest, manner of drawing a character.
For when my eares receau'd a fearfull sound
That he was sicke, I went, and there I found
Him laide of loue
The midwife's phrase.
, and newly brought to bed
Of monstrous folly, and a franticke head.
His chamber hang'd about with elegies,
With sad complaints of his loue's miseries:
His windows strow'd with sonnets, and the glasse
Drawne full of loue-knotts. I approacht the asse,
And straight he weepes, and sighes some sonnet out
To his faire loue! And then he goes about
For to perfvme her rare perfection
With some sweet-smelling pink-epitheton.
Then with a melting looke he writhes his head,
And straight in passion riseth in his bed;
And hauing kist his hand, strok'd vp his haire,
Made a French congè, cryes,
O cruell Faire,
To th' antique bed-post!—
In these lines there is great elegance of allusion, and vigour of expression. He addresses the objects of his satire, as the sons of the giants,
Is Minos dead, is Rhadamanth asleepe,
That thus ye dare vnto Ioue's palace creepe?
What, hath Rhamnusia spent her knotted whip,
That ye dare striue on Hebe's cup to sip?
Yet know, Apollo's quiuer is not spent,
But can abate your daring hardiment.
Python is slaine, yet his accursed race
Dare looke diuine Astrea in the face
SAT. 5.
.
In the same satire he calls himself,
A beadle to the world's impuritie!
Marston seems to have been the poetic rival of Hall at Cambridge, whom he repeatedly censures or ridicules. In the fourth satire, he supposes Hall's criticisms on Dubartas, the versions of David's Psalms by Sternhold and king James, Southwell's MARY and SAINT PETER'S TEARS, the MIRROUR OF MAGISTRATES, and other pieces of equal reputation, to be the production of pedantry or malignity. And the remainder of this satire is no unpleasant parody of Hall's prefatory stanzas against envy
It appears from the SCOURGE OF VILLANIE, that Hall had caused a severe Epigram to be pasted on the last page of every copy of Marston's PIGMALION'S IMAGE, that was sent from London to the booksellers of Cambridge. B. iii. 10. The Epigram is there cited. This tenth satire of the third Book was added in the second edition, in 1599. It is addressed
"to his very friend maister E. G."
One Edward Gilpin is cited in ENGLAND'S PARNASSUS, 1600.
It appears from this Satire, that the devices on shields and banners, at tournaments, were now taken from the classics.
He who upon his glorious scutchion,
Can quaintly show wits newe inuention,
Advancing forth some thirstie Tantalus,
Or els the vulture on Prometheus,
With some short motto of a dozen lines, &c.
Peacham says, that of Emblems and Impresses,
"the best I have seen have been the devices of tilting, whereof many were till of late reserved in the private gallery at White-Hall, of sir Philip Sydney, the earl of Cumberland, sir Henry Leigh, the earl of Essex, with many others: most of which I once collected with intent to publish them, but the charge dissuaded me."
COMPL. GENT. CH. xviii. p. 277. edit. 3• . 1661. 4to.
.
A Thrasonical captain, fresh from the siege of Cadiz, is delineated in this lively colouring.
Great Tubrio's feather gallantly doth waue,
Full twenty falls do make him wondrous braue!
Oh golden jerkin! Royall arming coate!
Like ship on sea, he on the land doth floate.—
—What newes from Rodio?
"Hot seruice, by the lord," cries Tubrio.
Why dost thou halt? "Why, six times through each thigh
"Push'd with the pike of the hot enemie.
"Hot service, Hot!—The Spaniard is a man.—
"I say no more—And as a gentleman
"I serued in his face. Farwell, Adew!"
Welcome from Netherland—from steaming stew
Sat. i.
.
Marston's allusions often want truth and accuracy. In describing the ruff of a beau, he says,
His ruffe did eate more time in neatest setting,
Than Woodstock-worke in painfull perfecting.
The comparison of the workmanship of a laced and plaited ruff, to the laboured nicety of the steel-work of Woodstock, is just. He adds, with an appearance of wit,
It hath more doubles farre than Ajax shield.
This was no exaggeration. The shield of Ajax was only sevenfold. To say nothing of one of the leading ideas, the delicacy of contexture, which could not belong to such a shield.
But Marston is much better known as a satirist by a larger and a separate collection, yet entirely in the strain of the last, called the SCOURGE OF VILLANY, published the same year. I will give the title exactly and at length.
"The SCOVRGE OF VILLANIE. Three Bookes of SATYRES. [No Name of the Author.]—Nec scombros metuentia carmina nec thus. At London, Printed by I. R. [James Roberts,] and are to be sold by John Buzbie, in Pawles churchyard, at the signe of of the Crane, 1598
In duodecimo. With vignettes. Wh. Let. The signatures run inclusively to, Sign. I 3. The title of the second edition is
"THE SCOURGE OF VILLANIE. By John Marston.
Nec scombros,
&c. At London. Printed by I. R. Anno Dom. 1599."
The tenth Satire is not in the former edition. All Marston's SATIRES, with other pieces of old poetry, were reprinted, Lond. for R. Horsfield, 1764, 12mo.
."
He here assumes the appellation of KINSAYDER, by which he is recognised among other cotemporary poets in the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS. In his metrical introduction, he wishes all readers of fashion would pass over his poetry, and rather examine the play-bills pasted on every post, or buy some ballad about the fairy king, and king Cophetua and the female beggar. Instead of a Muse, he invocates REPROOF, in this elegant and animated address.
I inuocate no Delian deitie,
Nor sacred offspring of Mnemosyne:
I pray in aid of no Castalian Muse,
No Nymph, no female angell, to infuse
A sprightly wit to raise my flagging wings,
And teach me tune these harsh discordant strings.
I craue no Syrens of our halcyon-times,
To grace the accents of my rough-hew'd rimes:
But grim Reproofe, sterne Hate of villany,
Inspire and guide a satyr's poesie!
Faire Detestation of fowle odious sinne,
In which our swinish times lie wallowing,
Be thou my conduct and my Genius,
My wit's inticing sweet-breath'd Zephirus!
Oh that a satyr's hand had force to pluck
Some floodgate vp, to purge the world from muck!
Would god, I could turne Alpheus' riuer in,
To purge this Augean stable from fowle sinne!
Well, I will try.—Awake, Impuritie!
And view the vaile drawne from thy villanie
B. iii. PROEM.
.
The passage reminds us of a witty line in Young's UNIVERSAL PASSION, I know not if borrowed from hence.
And cleanse the Augean stable with thy quill
There is a thought like this in Dekker's GULS HORNE BOOKE, 1609, p. 4.
"To pvrge [the world] will be a sorer labour, than the cleansing of Augeas' stable, or the scouring of Moore-ditch."
.
Part of the following nervous paragraph has been copied either by Dryden or Oldham.
Who would not shake a satyr's knotty rod,
When to defile the sacred name of god,
Is but accounted gentlemen's disport?
To snort in filth, each hower to resort
To brothell-pits: alas, a veniall crime,
Nay royal, to be last in thirtieth slime
B. i. 2.
?
In an invocation to RIME, while he is not inelegantly illustrating the pleasingness of an easy association of consonant syllables, he artfully intermixes the severities of satire.
Come prettie pleasing symphonie of words,
Ye well-match'd twins, whose like-tun'd tongue affords
Such musicall delight, come willingly,
And daunce Levoltos
An old fashionable dance. Hanmer, on Shakespeare, defines it to be a dance in which there was much capering and turning. HEN. V. A. iii. S. v. The word implies more
capering
than turning.
in my poesie!
Come all as easie as spruce Curio will,
In some court-hall to shew his capering skill:—
As willingly as wenches trip around,
About a may-pole, to the bagpipe's sound.—
—Let not my ruder hand
Seeme once to force you in my lines to stand:
Be not so fearefull, prettie soules, to meete,
As Flaccus is, the sergeant's face to greete:
Be not so backward-loth to grace my sense,
As Drusus is, to haue intelligence,
His dad's aliue: but come into my head,
As iocundly, as, when his wife was dead,
Young Lelius to his home. Come, like-fac'd Rime,
In tunefull number's keeping musick's time!
But if you hang an arse like Tubered,
When Chremes drag'd him from the brothel-bed,
Then hence, base ballad-stuffe! My poesie
Disclaimes you quite. For know, my libertie
Scornes riming lawes. Alas, poore idle sound!
Since first I Phebus knew, I neuer found,
Thy interest in sacred poetry:
Thou to Inuention addst but surquedry
Pride. False pomp.
,
A gaudie ornature: but hast no part
In that soule-pleasing high-infused art
B. ii. AD RITHMUM.
.
He thus wages war with his brother-bards, especially the dreamers in fairy land.
Here's one must inuocate some loose-leg'd dame,
Some brothel-drab, to help him stanzas frame.
Another yet dares tremblingly come out,
But first he must inuoke good COLIN CLOUT
Spenser as a pastoral writer.
.
Yon's one hath yean'd a fearefull prodigy,
Some monstrous and mishapen balladry
An allusion to some late Ballad, with a print, of a monster, or incredible event. A Ballad-monger is a character in,
"WHIMZIES, or a Newe Cast of CHARACTERS,"
where says the writer,
"For want of truer relations, for a neede, he can finde you out a Sussex-dragon, some sea or inland monster, &c."
Lond. 1631. CHA
. II. p. 9. For this Sussex dragon, see the Harleian miscellany.
.—
Another walkes, is lazie, lies him downe,
Thinkes, reades: at length, some wonted slepe doth crowne,
His new-falne lids, dreames: straight, ten pounds to one,
Out steps some Fayery with quick motion,
And tells him wonders of some flowery vale;
He wakes, he rubs his eyes, and prints his tale
B. ii. 6.
.
The following line is a ridicule on the poetical language of his time, which seems rather intended for certain strains of modern poetry.
Thou nursing
mother of faire wisdom's lore,
Ingenuous Melancholy
PROEM. B. i.
!—
He supposes himself talking with Esop, and alludes to the story of his coming into the streets of Athens to
look for a man
The introductory line, supposed to be spoken by Esop, is no unhappy parody on a well-known line in Shakespeare's RICHARD.
A Man, a Man, my kingdom for a man.
. This idea introduces several ridiculous characters. Among the rest a fine lady.
Peace, cynicke, see what yonder doth approach,
"A cart, a tumbrell?" No, a badged coach
A coach painted with a coat of arms. [See above, p. 39.]
.
"What's in't? Some Man." No, nor yet woman kinde,
But a celestiall angel, faire refinde.
"The divell as soone. Her maske so hinders me,
"I cannot see her beautie's deitie.
"Now that is off, she is so vizarded,
"So steep'd in lemon-iuyce, so surphuled
The word is often used by Hall and Marston. Our author supposes, that the practice came with other corruptions from Venice. CERT. SAT. 2.
Didst thou to Venis goe aught els to haue
But buy a lute, and vse a curtezan?—
And nowe from thence what hether dost thou bring,
But SURPHULINGS, new paints and poysoning,
Aretine's pictures, &c.
I find the word used for a meretricious styptic lotion.
"This mother baud hauing at home, a well paynted manerly harlot, as good a maid as Fletcher's mare, that bare three great foles, went in the morning to the apothecaries for halfe a pint of swete water, that commonly is called SURFULYNG water, or Clynckerdeuice, &c."
From
"A manifest DETECTION of the most vyle and detestable vse of DICE PLAY, &c. Imprinted at London in Paules church-yard, at the signe of the Lambe, by Abraham Vele."
No date. But early in the reign of Elisabeth. Bl. Lett. 12mo.
"Apothecaries would have SURPHALING water, and potatoe rootes, lie dead on their hands.—The suburbes should have a great misse of vs, and Shoreditch would complaine to dame Anne a Clear, &c."
Theeves falling out, True men come by their goods.
By R. G. Lond. 1615. 4to. SIGNAT. C. 3. Bl. Lett. See Steevens's Shakesp. ix. 168.
,
I cannot see her face.
Under one hood
"Two faces:
but I neuer understood,
"Or sawe one face under two hoods till nowe.
"Away, away! Hence, coachman, go inshrine,
"Thy new glaz'd puppet in port Esquiline
B. ii. 7. The classical reader recollects the meaning of this allusion to the Porta Esquilina at Rome. In passing, I will illustrate a few passages in Marston's satires.
Lib. iii. 11. He says,
Praise but ORCHESTRA, and the skipping art.
This is an allusion to sir John Davies's ORCHESTRA, a poetical dialogue between Penelope and one of her wooers, on the antiquity and excellency of Dancing, printed with his NOSCE TEIPSUM in 1599. This piece occasioned a humorous epigram from Harrington, EPIGR. B. ii. 67.
A few lines afterwards Marston says,
Roome for the spheres, the orbes celestiall
Will daunce KEMP'S IIGGE.—
Of Kemp, the original performer of Dogberry, I have spoken before. I find, entered to T. Gosson, Dec. 28, 1591. The third and last part of
"Kempe's Iigge."
Registr. STATION. B. f. 282. b. And May 2, 1595, to W. Blackwell,
"A ballad of Mr. Kempe's Newe ligge of the kitchen stuffe woman."
Ibid. f. 132. a. Again, Octob. 21, 1595, to T. Gosson, Kempe's Newe Iigge betwixt a soldier and a miser. Ibid. f. 3. b. In Kemp's NINE DAIES WONDER, printed in 1600, is the character of an innkeeper at Rockland, which could not be written by Kemp, and was most probably a contribution from his friend and fellow-player, Shakespeare. He may vie with our host of the Tabard. SIGNAT. B. 3.
He was a man not ouer spare,
In his eybals dwelt no care:
Anon, Anon,
and
coming friend,
Were the most words he vsde to spend:
Saue, sometime he would sit and tell,
What wonders once in Bullayne fell;
Closing each period of his tale
With a full cup of nut-browne ale.
Turwyn and Turney's siedge were hot,
Yet all my hoast remembers not:
Kets field, and Musseleborough fray,
Were battles fought but yesterday.
"O, twas a goodly matter then,
"To see your sword and buckler men!
"They would lay here, and here and there,
"But I would meet them every where, &c."
By this some guest cryes
ho, the house!
A fresh friend hath a fresh carouse.
Still will he drink, and still be dry,
And quaffe with euerey company.
Saint Martin send him merry mates
To enter at his hostry gates!
For a blither lad than he
Cannot an Innkeeper be.
In the same strain, is a description of a plump country lass, who officiates to Kemp in his morris-dance, as his Maid Marian. SIGNAT. B. 3. Jonson alludes to Kemp's performance of this morris-dance, from London to Norwich in nine dayes. EPIGR. cxxxiv.
—or which
Did dance the famous morrisse vnto Norwich.
But to return to Marston.
In the Preface called▪
In lectores prorsus indignos,
is the word "Proface." I do not recollect that the passage has been adduced by the late editors of Shakespeare. Vol. v. p. 595. edit. 1778.
Proface, read on, for your extreamst dislikes
Will add a pinion to my praises flights.
In the GULS HORNE BOOKE, 1609, p. 4.
"Comus, thou clarke of Gluttonie's kitchen, doe thou also bid me PROFACE."
In the same author's BELMAN OF LONDON, 1608, the second edition, Bl. Let
. 4to.
"The table being thus furnished, instead of Grace, everie one drewe out a knife, rapt out a round oath, and cried, PROFACE,
you mad rogves,
&c."
Signat. C. See also Taylor's SCULLER, EPIGR. 43. These instances may be added, to those which Farmer, Steevens, and Malone, have collected on the word. The meaning is obvious,
"Fall on—Much good may it do you."
B. i. 3.
Candied potatoes are Athenians meate. Our philosophers, our academics, indulge themselves in food inciting to venery.
B. i. 4.
He'll cleanse himself to Shoreditch puritie.
I have before observed that Shoreditch was famous for brothels. He just before speaks of a
"White friers queane. We have a Shoreditch baulke. B. iii. 11."
In his CERTAIN SATYRES he mentions the gallants trooping to "Brownes common." Sat. ii. In Goddard's MASTIF, or Satires, No Date. SAT. 27.
Or is he one that lets a
Shoreditch
wench
The golden entrailes of his purse to drench.
In Dekker's IESTS TO MAKE YOU MERIE, 1607. JEST. 59.
"Sixpenny signets that lay in the Spittle in Shoreditch."
In Middleton's INNER TEMPLE MASQUE, printed 1619.
Tis in your charge to pull down bawdy houses.
—Cause spoile SHOREDITCH,
And deface Turnbull [street.]—
And in the Preface to
The Letting of Humours blood in the head vaine,
or Satires, 1600, Signat. A. 2.
—Some coward gull
That is but champion to a
Shoreditch
drab.
I know not whether it will illustrate the antiquity of the Ballad of George Barnwell to observe, that the house of the Harlot, the heroine of the story, is in Shore-ditch. The CURTAINE, one of our old theaters, was in Shoreditch.
B. ii. PROEM. st. 3.
With tricksey tales of speaking Cornish dawes.
Tricksey,
I think, is an epither of Ariel in the TEMPEST. A
tricksie
strain occurs. B. iii. 9.
Ibid. st. 4.
What though some John a stile will basely toile.
This is the first use I remember of
John a Stiles.
But we have below, B. ii. 7.
Looke you, comes John a noke, and John a stile.
He means two lawyers.
B. ii. 7. Of a gallant,
Note his French herring-bones.—
His band-strings. Wood says, that Dr. Owen, dean of Christ church, and Cromwell's vice-chancellor at Oxford, in 1652, used to go, in contempt of form,
"like a young scholar, with powdred hair,
snakebone
bandstrings, or bandstrings with very large tassells, lawn band, a large set of ribbands, pointed, at his knees, and Spanish-leather boots with large lawn tops, and his hat mostly cocked."
ATHEN. OXON. ii. 738. Num. 572.
B. ii. 7. He is speaking of a Judge, in his furred
damaske-coate.
He's nought but budge.—
That is, fur. So Milton in COMUS, v. 707.
Those budge doctors of the stoick fur. He alludes to the furred gown of a graduate. See Life of SIR T. POPE, p. 285. edit. 2.
B. iii. 9. He speaks of a critic abusing Mortimer's numbers. I believe he means Drayton's epistle of MORTIMER TO QUEEN ISABEL. Drayton's EPISTLES appeared in 1597. Or perhaps Drayton's MORTIMERIADOS, published in 1596.
B. iii. 11.
—Lothsome brothell-rime,
That stinks like Aiax-froth, or muckpit slime.
He means sir John Harrington's Ajax, which gave great offence to queen Elizabeth. See Harrington's EPIGRAMS, B. i. 51. And Jonson, EPIGR. cxxxiv.
My Muse has plough'd with his that sung A-JAX.
B. ii. 7.
He nowe is forc'd his paunch and guts to pack
In a faire tumbrell.—
That is, To ride in a Coach. [See supr. p. 39.]
B. ii. 7.
Her seate of sense is her rebato set.
The
set of her rebato
is the
stiffness
of her ruff newly plaited, starched, and
poked.
To
set
a hat, is to
cock
a hat, in provincial language. The ruff was adjusted or trimmed by what they called a
poking-stick,
made of iron, which was gently heated. A pamphlet is entered to W. Wright, Jul. 4. 1590, called
"Blue starch and poking-stickes."
REGISTR. STATION. B. f. 260. a. Jonson says of a smoking coxcomb.
"The other opened his nostrils with a poaking-sticke, to giue the smoake more free deliuerie."
EUERIE M. OUT OF HIS H. Act. iii. Sc. iii.
In Goddard's
Dogges from the Antipedes,
a lady says, whose ruff was discomposed, SAT. 29.
"Lord! my ruffe! SETT it with thy finger, Iohn!"
And our author, Sc. VILL. i. z.
Lucia, new SET thy ruffe —
In the GULS HORNE BOOKE, p. 7.
"Your stiff-necked rebatoes, that have more arches for pride to rowe vnder, than can stand vnder fiue London bridges, durst not then
set
themselves out in print."
And hence we must explain a line in Hall, iii. 7.
His linnen collar Labyrinthian
set.
B. i. 3.
A Crabs bakt guts, a lobsters butterd thigh, &c.
So in Marston's MALECONTENT, printed 1604. A. ii. S. ii.
"Crabs guts baked, distilled ox-pith, the pulverized hairs of a lions upper lip, &c."
SAT. iii. 8.
I sawe him court his mistresse lookingglasse,
Worship a buske-point.—
A buske was a flexile pin or stick for keeping a woman's stays tight before. Marston's context too clearly explains the meaning of the word. So in PIGMALION'S IMAGE, st. xix.
Loue is a child contented with a toy,
A buske point or some favour stills the boy.
But see OLD-PLAYS, v. 251.
SATYRES, Sat. iv.
Ye Granta's white Nymphs come!—
White
was antiently used as a term of fondling or endearment. In the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, 1606, Amoretto's Page says,
"When he returns, I'll tell twenty admirable lies of his hawk: and then I shall be his little rogue, his WHITE villain, for a whole week after."
A. ii. S. vi. Doctor Busby used to call his favourite scholars, his
White Boys.
I could add a variety of other combinations.
.
He thus nervously describes the strength of custom.
For ingrain'd habits, died with often dips,
Are not so soon discoloured. Young slips
New set are easly mou'd, and pluck'd away;
But elder roots clip faster in the clay
B. i. 4.
.
Of the influence of the drama, which now began to be the most polite and popular diversion, on conversation, we have the following instance.
Luscus, what's plaid to day? Faith, now I know,
I set thy lips abroach, from whence doth flowe
Nought but pure JULIET AND ROMEO.
Say, who acts best, Drusus or Roscio?
Nowe I have him, that nere, if aught, did speake
But when of playes or players he did treate:
Hath made a common-place book out of playes,
And speakes in print: at least whateer he sayes,
Is warranted by curtaine-
plaudities.
If eer you heard him courting Lesbia's eyes,
Say, courteous sir, speakes he not movingly
From out some new pathetique tragedy
B. iii. 11.
?
He appears to have been a violent enemy of the puritans.
—But thou, rank Puritan,
I'll make an ape as good a christian:
I'll force him chatter, turning vp his eye,
Look sad, go graue, Demure civilitie
Shall scorne to say,
good brother, sister deare!
As for the rest, to snort in belly cheere,
To bite, to gnaw, and boldly intermell
With holy things, in which thou dost excell,
Vnforc'd he'll doe. O take compassion
Euen on your soules: make not Religion
A bawde to lewdnesse. Civil Socrates,
Clip not the youth of Alcibiades
With vnchast armes. Disguised Messaline,
I'll teare thy mask, and bare thee to the eyne, &c
B. iii. 9.
.
It is not that I am afraid of being tedious, that I find myself obliged to refrain from producing any more citations. There are however, a few more passages which may safely be quoted, but which I choose to reserve for future illustration.
There is a carelessness and laxity in Marston's versification, but there is a freedom and facility, which Hall has too frequently missed, by labouring to confine the sense to the couplet. Hall's measures are more musical, not because the music of verse consists in uniformity of pause, and regularity of cadence. Hall had a correcter ear; and his lines have a tuneful strength, in proportion as his language is more polished, his phraseology more select, and his structure more studied. Hall's meaning, among other reasons, is not always so soon apprehended, on account of his compression both in sentiment and diction. Marston is more perspicuous, as he thinks less and writes hastily. Hall is superiour in penetration, accurate conception of character, acuteness of reflection, and the accumulation of thoughts and images. Hall has more humour, Marston more acrimony. Hall often draws his materials from books and the diligent perusal of other satirists, Marston from real life. Yet Hall has a larger variety of characters. He possessed the talent of borrowing with address, and of giving originality to his copies. On the whole, Hall is more elegant, exact, and elaborate.
It is Marston's misfortune, that he can never keep clear of the impurities of the brothel. His stream of poetry, if sometimes bright and unpolluted, almost always betrays a muddy bottom. The satirist who too freely indulges himself in the display of that licentiousness which he means to proscribe, absolutely defeats his own design. He inflames those passions which he professes to suppress, gratifies the depravations of a prurient curiosity, and seduces innocent minds to an acquaintance with ideas which they might never have known.
The satires of Hall and Marston were condemned to the same flame and by the same authority. But Hall certainly deserved a milder sentence. Hall exposes vice, not in the wantonness of description, but with the reserve of a cautious yet lively moralist. Perhaps every censurer of obscenity does some harm, by turning the attention to an immodest object. But this effect is to be counteracted by the force and propriety of his reproof, by shewing the pernicious consequences of voluptuous excesses, by suggesting motives to an opposite conduct, and by making the picture disgustful by dashes of deformity. When Vice is led forth to be sacrificed at the shrine of virtue, the victim should not be too richly dressed.
SECT. XLVIII.
THE popularity of Hall's and Marston's Satires, notwithstanding their proscription or rather extermination by spiritual authority, produced an innumerable crop of SATIRISTS, and of a set of writers, differing but little more than in name, and now properly belonging to the same species, EPIGRAMMATISTS.
In 1598, printed at London, appeared
"SKIALETHEIA, or a Shadowe of Truth in certaine Epigrams and Satyres."
The same year, SEUEN SATIRES, applied to the week, including the world's ridiculous follies
Entered to William Fyrebrand, May 3, 1598. REGISTR. STATION. C. f. 34. b.
. This form was an imitation of the SEMAINES of Du Bartas, just translated into English by Delisle. The same year,
"A SHADOWE of TRUTH in certaine Epigrams and Satires.
Entered to N. Linge, Sept. 15, 1598. Ibid. f. 41. b.
."
This year also, as I conjecture, were published Epigrams by sir John Davies, author of NOSCE TEIPSUM
Marlowe's OVID'S ELEGIES were accompanied with these Epigrams. The whole title is,
"Epigrammes and Elegies, by J. D. and C. M. [Marlowe.] at Middleburgh."
No date. Davies's Epigrams are commended in Jonson's Epigrams, xviii. And in Fitzgeoffry's AFFANIAE, Lib. ii. Signat E. 4.
DAVISIOS laedat mihi, Jonsoniosque lacessat.
. These must not be confounded with the SCOURGE OF FOLLY, by John Davies of Hereford, printed in 1611. In 1598 also, was published in quarto,
"Tyros roaring Megge, planted against the walls of Melancholy, London, 1598."
With two Decads of Epigrams
With
"sequitur Tyronis Epistola."
Compare Wood, ATH. OXON, F. i. 219.
. The author appears to have been of Cambridge. Tyro is perhaps a real name. The dedication is to Master John Lucas.
In the year 1598, was also published, under the general title of CHRESTOLOROS, seven Books of Epigrams, by Thomas Bastard
Entered to Joane Brome, Apr. 3, 1598. Ibid. f. 38. b.
. Bastard, a native of Blandford in Dorsetshire, was removed from a fellowship of New-College Oxford, in 1591, being, as Wood says,
"much guilty of the vices belonging to the poets, "and given to libelling
ATH. OXON. i. 431.
."
Harrington, the translator of Ariosto, has an Epigram addressed to
"Master Bastard, a minister, that made a pleasant Booke of English Epigrams
HARRINGTON'S EPIGRAMS, B. ii. 64. See also B. ii. 84. They are also mentioned with applause in Goddard's MASTIF, no date, SAT. 81. And in Parrot's SPRINGES FOR WOODCOCKES, Lib. i. EPIGR. 118.
."
Wood, in his manuscript Collection of Oxford libels and lampoons, which perhaps he took as much pleasure in collecting as the authors in writing, now remaining in the Ashmolean Museum, and composed by various students of Oxford in the reign of queen Elizabeth, has preserved two of Bastard's satyrical pieces
One of them is entitled,
"An admonition to the City of Oxford, or Mareplate's Bastardine."
In this piece, says Wood, he
"reflects upon all persons of note in Oxford, who were guilty of amorous exploits, or that mixed themselves with other men's wives, or with wanton houswives in Oxon."
The other is a disavowal of this lampoon, written after his expulsion, and beginning
Jenkin, why man,
&c. See Meres, WITS TR. f. 284.
. By the patronage or favour of lord treasurer Suffolk, he was made vicar of Bere-regis, and rector of Hamer, in Dorsetshire; and from writing smart epigrams in his youth, became in his graver years a quaint preacher
There are two sets of his Sermons, Five, London, 1615, 4to. The three first of these are called the MARIGOLD OF THE SUN. Twelve, London, 1615. 4to.
. He died a prisoner for debt, in Dorchester-gaol, April 19, 1618. He was an elegant classic scholar, and appears to have been better qualified for that species of the occasional pointed Latin epigram established by his fellow-collegian John Owen, than for any sort of English versification.
In 1599, appeared
"MICROCYNICON sixe snarling satyres by T. M. Gentleman,"
perhaps Thomas Middleton. About the same time appeared, without date, in quarto, written by William Goddard,
"A MASTIF WHELP, with other ruff-iland-like currs fetcht from amongst the Antipedes, which bite and barke at the fantastical humourists and abusers of the time. Imprinted at the Antipedes, and are to be bought where they are to be sold."
It contains eighty-five satires. To these is added,
"Dogges from the Antipedes,"
containing forty one
The name of the author, who appears to have been a soldier, is added in the Dedication, to some of his
flatt-cappe
friends at the Temple. The Satires were written after Bastard's EPIGRAMS, which are commended, SAT. 81. I will give a specimen from the second part, SAT. 5.
To see Morilla in her coach to ride,
With her long locke of haire vpon one side;
With hatt and feather worn in swaggring gvise,
With buttned boddice, skirted dubblettwise,
Vnmaskt, and sit i' th' booth without a fanne:
Speake, could you iudge her lesse than be some manne, &c.
Here is the dress of a modern amazon, in what is called a
Riding-habit.
The sidelock of hair, which was common both to men and women, was called the French Lock. So Freeman of a beau, in RUB AND A GREAT CAST, edit. 1614, EPIGR. 32.
Beside a long French locke.—
And Hall, SAT. iii. 7.
His haire French-like stares on his frighted head,
One locke, amazon-like, disheveled.
Hence may be illustrated a passage in a
Letting of Humours blood,
&c. printed about 1600. EPIGR. 27.
Aske Humors why a feather he doth weare,—
Or what he doth with such a horsetail locke.
See also Perrott's
Springes for Woodcockes,
or Epigrams, 1613, Lib. i. EPIGR. i. Of a beau.
And on his shoulder weares a dangling locke.
In B. Rich's OPINION DEIFIED, &c.
"Some by wearing a
long locke
that hangs
dangling
by his eare, do think by that louzie commoditie to be esteemed by the opinion of foolery."
Lond. 1613. 4to. ch. xxix. p. 53. Again, in RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, 1606, A. iii. S. ii.
Must take tobacco, and must
weare a lock.
Compare Warburton's note on MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING, A. v. S. i.
"He wears a key in his ear, and a long lock hanging by it, &c."
I add but one more instance, from the character of a RUFFIAN, or bully.
"When without money, his gingling spurre hath last his voyce, his head his
locke,
&c."
WHIMZIES, or a new Cast of CHARACTERS, Lond. 1631. 16mo. p. 136.
.
A satyrical piece in stanzas, which has considerable merit, called PASQUILL'S MAD-CAP, was printed at London in quarto, for V. S. in the year 1600
He says, p. 36.
And tell prose writers, STORIES are so stale,
That penie ballads make a better sale.
He mentions country-players, p. 31. PASQUILL'S MAD-CAP is applauded in THE WHIPPINGE OF THE SATYRE, 1601. Signat. F. 3.
That MAD-CAP yet superiour praise doth win, &c.
In Dekker's GUL'S HORNE BOOK, 1609, we have,
"I am the Pasquill's MAD-CAPPE that will doot."
p. 8.
"PASQUILL'S IESTS, with the merriments of mother Bunch,"
were published, Lond. 1629. Bl. Let. 4to. But this I suppose not to have been the first edition. And in reference to Pasquill's MAD-CAP, there is,
"Old Mad-cappes new gallimaufry, made into a merrie messe of mingle mangle, 1602."
. With Pasquill's MESSAGE. Also by the same author, perhaps Nicholas Breton, Pasquill's FOOLE-CAP, printed for T. Johnes in the same year, the dedication signed, N. B. At the end is
"Pasquill's passion for the world's waiwardnesse
Under the title of PASQUIN, we have also the following coeval pieces.
"PASQUILL'S MISTRESSE, or the worthie and unworthie woman, 1600.—PASQUILL'S PASSE, and passeth not, set downe in three pees, 1600.—PASQUILL'S PALINODIA, and his Progresse to the taverne, where, after the survey of the Sellar, you are presented with a pleasant pynte of poeticall sherry, 1619."
."
In the year 1601, was published in duodecimo,
"The whipper of the Satyre, his pennance in a white sheete, Or the Beadles Confutation, Imprinted at London, by John Fasket, 1601."
And by way of reply,
"No whippinge nor trippinge, but a kind of snippinge, London, 1601."
Again,
"The whipping of the SATYRE, Imprinted at London for John Flasket, 1601
In duodecimo. It is dedicated to the
"Vayne glorious, the HUMOURIST, SATYRIST, and EPIGRAMMATIST."
The writer's initials are I. W. I believe this piece to be a Reply to Rowlands. But in one place he seems to attack Marston. Signat. D 2.
But harke, I heare the Cynicke Satyre crie,
A man, a man, a kingdom for a man!
He mentions the Fatness of Falstaff. Signat. D 3.
That sir John Falstaffe was not any way
More grosse in body, than you are in brayne.
."
About the same time, as I conjecture, were published,
"Epigrams served out in fifty-two severall dishes, for every man to taste without surfeting. By I. C. gentleman."
At London, without date. In 1608,
"Epigrams, or Humour's Lottery
Entered, April 11, to Busbie and Holme. REGISTR. STATION. C. f. 165. b.
."
The same year,
"A Century of Epigrams, by R. W. Bachelor of Arts, Oxon
Entered, Apr. 21, to T. Thorpe, Ib. f. 166. a. I take R. W. to be Richard West, who is the author of
"Newes from Bartholomew fair,"
entered to I. Wright, Jul. 16, 1606. Ibid. f. 141. b. I find
"Merry Jests, concerning popes, monks, and fryers, from the French, by R. W. Bachelor of Arts, of H. H. [Hart-Hall] Oxon, assigned to John Barnes."
REGISTR. STATION. D. f. 11. a.
."
The same year,
"Satyres, by Richard Myddleton, gentleman, of Yorke
Entered to Jos. Harrison, May 4. REGISTR. C. f. 167. a.
."
In 1619,
"Newe Epigrams, having in their Companie a mad satyre, by Joseph Martin, London, for Elde
There is a second edition entered to Elde, May 8, 1621. REGISTR. D. f. 15. a. In 1617,
"A paraphrasticke transcript of Juvenal's tenth Satyre, with the tragicall narrative of Virginia's death is entered, Oct. 14, to N. Newbury."
REGISTR. C. f. 284. b.
."
In 1613, were published two books of epigrams, written by Henry Perrot, entitled,
"LAQUEI RIDICULOSI, or Springes for Woodcockes.
Caveat emptor.
Lond. for J. Busbie, 1613
In the Latin Dedication, it appears they were written in 1611. Mr. Steevens quotes an edition in 1606. Shakesp. Vol. viii. 409.
."
Many of them are worthy to be revived in modern collections. I am tempted to transcribe a specimen.
A Welshman and an Englishman disputed,
Which of their Lands
Countries.
maintain'd the greatest state:
The Englishman the Welshman quite confuted;
Yet would the Welshman nought his brags abate;
"Ten cookes in Wales, quoth he, one wedding sees;
"True, quoth the other,—
Each man toasts his cheese
Lib. i. EPIGR. 9.
Taylor the water poet, has mentioned Parrot's Epigrams, in EPIGRAMS, p. 263. fol. edit. EPIGR. vii.
My Muse hath vow'd reuenge shall haue her swindge,
To catch a
Parrot
in the woodcockes springe.
See also p. 265. EPIGR. xxxi.
."
John Weaver, I believe the antiquary who wrote ANTIENT FUNERAL MONUMENTS, published a book of Epigrams, in 1599, or rather 1600, which are ranked among the best, by Jonson
Jonson's EPIGR. xviii. They are in duodecimo, and cited in ENGLAND'S PARNASSUS, 1600.
. Thomas Freeman, a student in Magdalen college Oxford, about the year 1607, who appears to have enjoyed the friendship and encouragement of Owen, Shakespeare, Daniel, Donne, Chapman, and Heywood the dramatist, printed in quarto,
"RUB AND A GREAT CAST. In one hundred Epigrams, London, 1614
I am tempted to give the following specimen of our author's humour, more especially as it displays the growing extent of London, in the year 1614. Sign. B. 3. EPIGR. 13.
LONDON'S PROGRESSE.
Quo ruis, ab demens?—
Why how nowe, Babell, whither wilt thou build?
I see old Holborne, Charing-crosse, the Strand,
Are going to Saint Giles's in the field.
Saint Katerne she takes Wapping by the hand,
And Hogsdon will to Hygate ere't be long.
London is got a great way from the streame,
I thinke she meanes to go to Islington,
To eate a dishe of strawberries and creame.
The City's sure in
progresse
I surmise,
Or going to revell it in some disorder,
Without the walls, without the Liberties,
Where she neede feare nor Mayor nor Recorder.
Well, say she do, 'twere pretty, yet tis pitty,
A
Middlesex
Bailiff should arrest the
Citty.
This poetical rant has been verified far beyond the writer's imagination.
."
To these is annexed,
"RUB AND A GREAT CAST. The second Bowl in an hundred Epigrams."
Both sets are dedicated to Thomas Lord, Windsor. Thomas Wroth of Glocester-Hall, Oxford, about 1603, published at London, in quarto, 1620,
"An Abortive of an idle Hour, or a century of Epigrams
They are mentioned with applause in Stradling's EPIGRAMMATA, published 1607.
."
To the opening of 1600, I would also assign
"The MASTIVE or young Whelpe of the old dogge. Epigrams and Satyres. London, printed by Thomas Creede. In quarto, without date."
The Advertisement to the reader is subscribed H. P
I know not if these initials mean Henry Parrot, an epigrammatist before recited. There is also,
"THE MORE THE MERRIER, containing threescore and odde headlesse Epigrams shott, like the Fools bolt amongst you, light where you will. By H. P. Gent."
Lond. 1608. 4to.
"Who says in his dedication, Concerning vnsauorie lewdnesse, which many of our Epigrammatist so much affect, I haue esteemed it fitter for Pick-hatch than Powles churchyard."
Is H. P. for Henry Peacham? One of the Epigrams (Epig. 51.) in the last mentioned collection appears, with some little difference only, in Peacham's MINERVA, fol. 61. edit. 4to. By one H. P. are
"Characters and Cures for the Itch. Characters, Epigrams, Epitaphs."
A BALLAD-MAKER is one of the characters, p. 3. London, for T. Jones, 1626. 12mo.
. We are sure that they were at least written after Churchyard's death: for in the third Epigram, the writer says, that Haywood was
held for
EPIGRAMS
the best
when Churchyard wrote
I have some faint remembrance of a collection of Epigrams, by Thomas Harman, about the year 1599. Perhaps he is the same who wrote the following very curious tract, unmentioned by Ames.
"A Caueat for common
vrsitors uulgariter, called Uagabondes, set forth by Thomas Harman, esqvier, for the vtilitie and proffyt of his naturall countrey. Newly augmented and imprinted Anno domini. M. D. LXVII. Imprinted at London in fletestrete, at the signe of the faulcon, by Wylliam Gryffith, and are to be solde at his shoope, in saynt Dunstones churchyard, in the west."
A quarto in black letter, with a wooden cut in the title. In the work, is a reference to the first edition in the preceding year, 1566. It is dedicated, with singular impropriety, to Elizabeth countess of Shrewsbury. The writer speaks of his lodgings
"at the White fryers within the cloyster."
fol. 20. b. This seems to have given rise to another piece of the same sort, unnoticed also by Ames,
"The fraternitye of vacabondes, as wel of ruflyng vacabondes, as of beggerly, as women as of men, of gyrles as of boyes, &c. Wherevnto also is adioyned the xxv order of Knaues, &c. Imprinted at London, by Iohn Awdely, dwellyng in little Britayne streete, without Aldersgate, 1575."
Bl. Let. 4to. These, by the way, are some of the first books exhibiting, not only the tricks but the language, of thieves, which Jonson has introduced into his MASQUE OF GIPSIES. Compare Ames, HIST. PR. p. 423.
.
Some of the critics of the author's days are thus described.
The mending poet takes it next in hand;
Who hauing oft the verses ouerscan'd,
"O filching!" straight doth to the stat'ner say,
"Here's foure lines stolen from my last newe play."—
Then comes my Innes of court-man in his gowne,
Cryes,
Mew!
What hackney brovght this wit to towne?
But soone again my gallant youth is gon,
Minding the kitchen
They were famous for their entertainments at the inns of court.
more than Littleton.
Tut
what cares he for law, shall haue inough
When's father dyes, that canker'd miser-chuffe.
Next after him the countrey farmer
Country gentleman, yeoman.
views it,
"It may be good, saith he, for those that vse it:
"Shewe me king ARTHUR, BEUIS, or SIR GUY, &c
Old Romances. SAT. ii. SIGNAT. H. 3.
."
In these days, the young students of the Inns of Court, seem to have been the most formidable of the critics
Hence, among a variety of instances, says Marston in the second preface to his SCOURGE OF VILLANY.
Some pedant spruce, or some span-new-come fry,
Of Inns a-court, striuing to vilefie
My darke reproofes, &c.
.
The figure and stratagems of the hungry captain, fresh from abroad, are thus exposed.
Marke, and you love me.—Who's yond' marching hither?
Some braue Low-Countrey Captain with his feather,
And high-crown'd hat. See, into Paules
The iles of Saint Paul's church were the fashionable walk.
he goes,
To showe his doublet, and and Italian hose.
The whiles his Corporal walkes the other ile,
To see what simple gulls he can beguile
Sat. iii. SIGNAT. I. 2.
.
The wars in Spain and the Low-countries filled the metropolis with a set of needy military adventurers, returning from those expeditions, who were a mixture of swaggering and submission, of flattery and ferocity, of cowardice and courage, who assumed a sort of professional magnanimity, yet stooped to the most ignominious insults, who endeavoured to attract the attention of the public, by the splendour of martial habiliments, were ready for any adventures of riot and debauchery, and insinuated themselves into favour by hyperbolical narrations of their hazardous atchievements. Jonson's Bobadill was of this race of heroic rakes. We have seen one of them admirably described by Marston
And in another place, B. ii. 7.
What, meanst thou him, that in his swaggering slops
Wallowes vnbraced all along the streete?
He that salvtes each gallant he doth meete,
With
farewell capitaine, kind heart,
adew!
He that the last night, tumbling thou didst view,
From out the great man's head
A sign.
, and thinking still,
He had been sentinell of warlike Brill, &c.
The
great man's
head, if the true reading, must be a cant word for the Sign of some tavern. Harrington has an Epigram of one getting drunk at the
Sarazens head.
B. i. 52. W. Fenner mentions the Saracen's head, without Newgate, and another without Bishopsgate, both famous for ferocity of feature. The Compter's
Commonwealth,
&c. p. 3. Lond. 1617. 4to. Brill, which we now call The Brill, is a town in the Netherlands. See also Hall, SAT. iv. 4.
And pointed on the shoulders for the nonce,
As new come from the Belgian garrisons.
.
In 1600 appeared, a mixture of Satires and Epigrams,
"THE LETTING OF HUMOURS BLOOD IN THE HEAD VAINE, with a new morisco daunced by seauen satyrs, upon the bottom of Diogenes tubbe,"
written by Samuel Rowlands, and printed by William White
In small octavo. There is another edition, without date, in small quarto, exhibiting a very different title,
"HUMORS ORDINARIE, where a man may be
verie marrie,
and
exceedingly
well vsed for his
six-pence.
At London, Printed for William Firebrand, &c."
I know not which is the first of the two. He praises Tarleton the comedian, for his part of the Clowne, and his Clownishe
oppe,
EPIGR. 30. And Pope for his part of the Clowne. SAT. iv. Singer the player is also mentioned. ibid. One Samuel Rowlands, I know not if the same, has left in verse,
"The Betraying of Christ, Judas in despair, The seven wounds of our Saviour on the crosse, with other poems on the passion,"
dedicated to sir Nicholas Walsh, knight, 1598, for Adam Islip, in quarto. Under the same name I have seen other religious poems, rather later. See Percy's BALL. iii. 117.
.
In a panegyric on Charnico, a potation mentioned by Shakespeare, he alludes to the unfortunate death of three cotemporary poets, two of which are perhaps Green and Marlowe, or perhaps George Peele
It is called a
sparkling
liquor, in Goddard's MASTIF-WHELP, or Satires, no date. SAT. 63. [See Notes to SE
. P. HENR. vi. A. ii. S. 3.]
—I will steepe
Thy muddy braines in sparkling CHA
NICO.
See Reed's OLD PLAYS, iii. 457.
.
As for the Worthies on his hoste's walle
Pictures on the walls of the tavern.
,
He knowes three worthy drunkards passe them alle:
The first of them, in many a tauerne tride,
At last subdued by
Aquavitae
dide:
His second worthy's date was brought to fine,
Freshing with oysters, and braue Rhenish wine.
The third, whom diuers Dutchmen held full deere,
Was stabb'd by pickled herrings and stronge beere.
Well, happy is the man doth rightly know,
The vertue of three cuppes of Charnico
Sat. vi. Again, EPIGR. 22. Marlow's end has been before related. Robert Green was killed by a surfeit of pickled herrings and Rhenish wine. This was in 1592. At which fatal banquet Thomas Nash was present. Meres says, that Peele died of the venereal disease. WITS TR. f. 285. p. 2. He must have been dead before, or in, 1598.
!
The rotation of fashionable pleasures, and the mode of passing a day of polite dissipation in the metropolis, are thus represented. The speaker is SIR REVELL, who is elegantly dressed in a
dish-crowned
hat and square-toed shoes.
Speake, gentlemen, what shall we do to day?
Drinke some braue health vpon the Dutch carouse
Marston asks, what a traveller brings from Holland, CERT. SAT. ii.
From Belgia what, but their deep bezeling,
Their boote-carouse, and their beerebuttering.
Again, Sc. VILLAN. B. i. 3.
In Cyprian dalliance, and in Belgick cheere.
,
Or shall we to the GLOBE, and see a Play?
Or visit Shoreditch for a bawdie house
See George Wither's ABUSES STRIPT AND WHIPT, or SATYRICAL ESSAYES, Lond. 1615. 12mo. The SCOURGE, p. 277.
.—But here approaches
A troop, with torches hurried in their coaches,
Stay, and behold, what are they? I can tell,
Some bound for Shoreditch, or for Clarkenwell.
O, these are they which thinke that fornication, &c.
See above, p. 64.
?
Let's call for cardes, or dice, and have a game:
To sit thus idle, &c
EPIGR. 7.
.
In another we have the accomplished fashion-monger
I will subjoin the same character from Marston's SCOURGE OF VILLANIE, which is more witty, but less distinct and circumstantial. B. iii. 11.
This fashion-monger, each morne fore he rise,
Contemplates sute-shapes, and once out of bed,
He hath them straight full lively portrayed:
And then he chuckes, and is as proude of this,
As Taphus when he got his neighbours blisse.
All fashions, since the first yeare of the Queene,
May in his study fairly drawne be scene;—
The long Fooles coat, the huge slop, the lug'd boote,
From mimick Pyso all doe claime their roote.
O, that the boundlesse power of the soule
Should be coup'd vp in fashioning some roule!
See above, a fantastic beau by Hall, p. 30.
.
Behold a most accomplish'd cavaleere,
That the world's ape of fashions doth appeare!
Walking the streets, his humour to disclose,
In the French doublet, and the German hose:
The muffe, cloak, Spanish hat, Toledo blade,
Italian ruffe, a shoe right Flemish made:
Lord of misrule, where'er he comes he'll revell, &c
EPIGR. 25.
.
In another, of a beau still more affected, he says,
How rare his spurres do ring the morris dance
EPIGR. 32. Boots were a mark of dignity or elegance, ibid. EPIGR. 8.
He scornes to walke in Powles without his bootes.
!
One of the swaggerers of the times, who in his rambles about the town, visits the Royal Exchange as a mercantile traveller, is not unluckily delineated.
Sometimes into the Royal 'Change he'll droppe,
Clad in the ruines of a broker's shoppe.
And there his tongue runs byass on affaires,
No talk, but of commodities and wares.—
If newes be harken'd for, then he prevalyes,
Setting his mynt at worke to coyne new tayles
Hall has a character partly resembling this, SAT. vi. 1.
Tattelius, the new-come traueller,
With his disguised coate, and ringed ear,
Trampling the bourse's marble twice a day,
Tells nothing but starke truths, I dare well say, &c.
The
bourse's marble
is the pavement of the Royal Exchange, now newly erected by sir Thomas Gresham. The Royal Exchange seems to have been frequented by hungry walkers as well as saint Pauls, from Robert Hayman's QUODLIBETS, or EPIGRAMS, &c. Lond. 1628. 4to. Epigr. 35. p. 6.
TO SIR PEARCE PENNILESSE.
Though little coyne thy purselesse pockets lyne,
Yet with great company thou'rt taken vp;
For often with duke Humfray thou dost dyne,
And often with sir Thomas Gresham sup.
.—
He'll tell you of a tree that he doth knowe,
Vpon the which rapiers and daggers growe,
As good as Fleetstrete hath in any shoppe,
Which being ripe downe into scabbards droppe.—
His wondrous trauells challenge such renowne,
That sir Iohn Mandeuille is qvite pvt downe
Hall alludes to sir John Mandevill's TRAVELLS, a book not yet out of vogue. SAT. B. iv. 6.
Or whetstone leesings of old Mandeuille.
And in the IRISH BANQUET,
or the Mayors feast of Youghall,
Certain pieces of this age parabolized in T. Scot's PHILOMYTHIE, printed in 1606. 8vo. Signat. M. 2.
Of Ladies loues, of Turnaies, and such sights
As Mandeville nere saw.—
I have
"THE SPANISH MANDEVILE OF MIRACLES, translated from the Spanish,"
Lond. 1618. 4to. The Dedication, to lord Buckhurst, is dated 1600.
.
Men without heads, and pigmies hand breadth hie,
Those, with no legges, that on their backs do lie;
Or
Or those, who having legs, and lying on their backs, &c.
, do the weather's iniurie sustaine,
Making their leggs a penthouse for the raine
SAT. i. In these Satires, Monsieur Domingo, a drunkard is mentioned. EPIGR. i. See Shakesp. SEC. P. H. iv. A. 5. S. 3.
.
Gabriel Harvey, in his Four Letters printed in 1592, quotes some English hexameters, from
"those vnsatyrical Satyres, which Mr. Spencer long since embraced in an overloving sonnet
LET. iii. p. 44.
."
This passage seems to indicate a set of satires, now unknown, to which Spenser had prefixed the undeserved honour of a recommendatory sonnet, now equally forgotten.
Meres, who wrote in 1598, observes,
"As Horace, Lucilius, Juvenal, Persius, and Lucullus, are the best for SATYRE among the Latins, so with us, in the same faculty these are chiefe: Piers PLOWMAN, Lodge, Hall of Emanuel colledge in Cambridge, the author of PIGMALION'S IMAGE AND CERTAINE SATYRES
Marston's SCOURGE OF VILLANIE had not yet appeared.
, the author of SHIALETHIA
Fol. 282. 2.
."
And in another place, having cited some of Marston's satires, he adds Rankins as a satirist
Fol. 277.
. I have never elsewhere seen the name of Rankins. Nor have I seen Lodge's Satires, unless his
"ALARUM AGAINST USURERS, containing tried experiences against worldly abuses,"
and its appendix his History of Forbonius and Prisaeria, printed at London, in 1584, may be considered under that character.
Wood also, a great dealer in the works of our old minor poets, yet at the same time a frequent transcriber from Meres, still more embarrasses this matter, where he says, that Lodge, after he left Trinity college at Oxford, about the year 1576, and
"had spent some time in exercising his fancy among the poets in the great city, he was esteemed, not Joseph Hall of Emanuel college excepted, the best for satyr among English men
ATH. OXON. i. 498.
."
Lodge was fitted for a different mode of composition. He was chiefly noted for pastorals, madrigals, and sonnets; and for his EUPHUES GOLDEN LEGACY, which furnished the plot of the AS YOU LIKE IT of Shakespeare. In an extended acceptation, many of the prose-pamphlets written about this period, by Greene and Decker, which paint or expose popular foibles and fashions, particularly Decker's GUL'S HORN-BOOK, a manual or directory for initiating an unexperienced spendthrift into the gaieties of the metropolis, might claim the appellation of satires
Harrrington in his Epigrams, mentions the Satires of a poet whom he often attacks under the name of Lynus. B. i. 67.
His Distickes, SATYRES, Sonnets and Hexameters,
His Epigrams, his Lyricks, and Pentameters.
And again, he has an Epigram
"Against a foolish Satyrist, called Lynus."
B. i. 14. See also, B. i. 41.
. That the rage of writing satires, and satirical epigrams, continued long, will appear from a piece of some humour, called
"An Inquisition against Paper-persecutors,"
written in 1625
By A. H. Lond. for H. H. 1625. p. 1. At the end of
"A Scourge for Paperpersecutors, by I. D."
And shall it still be so? Nor is't more hard
To repaire Paul's, than to mend Paul's church-yard?
Still shall the youths that walk the middle ile,
To whet their stomacks before meales, compile
Their sudden volumes, and be neuer barr'd
From scattering their bastards through the yard?—
—It is no wonder,
That Paul's so often hath beene strucke with thunder;
Twas aimed at those shops, in which there lie
Such a confvsed heape of trumperie,
Whose titles each terme on the posts are rear'd,
In such abundance, it is to be fear'd
That they in time, if thus they go on, will
Not only LITTLE but GREAT Britain fill,
With their infectious swarmes, whose guilty sheetes
I haue obserued walking in the streetes;
Still lurking neare some church, as if hereby
They had retired to a sanctuary,
For murdering paper so.—
—Each drincking lozell nowe,
That hath but seen a colledge, and knows howe, &c.
After having censured those who versified the bible, and made it all Apocryphal, but with a compliment to the translators of Du Bartas, he adds,
Others that nere search'd newe-born vice at all,
But the Seuen Deadly Sinnes in generall,
Drawne from the tractate of some cloyster'd frier,
Will needs write SATYRES, and in raging fire
Exasperate their sharpe poeticke straine;
And thinke they haue touch'd it, if they raile at Spaine,
The pope, and devill.—
The reader will recollect, that Saint Paul's church-yard and its environs, in which was LITTLE-BRITAIN, abounded with shops and stalls of booksellers: that its steeple was thrown down by lightening, in 1561: and that a general reparation of the church was now become a great object of the nation.
. But of this, more distinct proofs will appear in the progress of our history.
It must not be forgotten, that a second impression of an English version of Ariosto's Satires, which contain many anecdotes of his life and circumstances, and some humourous tales, and which are marked with a strong vein of free reprehension, but with much less obscenity than might be expected from satires written by the author of ORLANDO FURIOSO, appeared in long verse, by an anonymous translator, in 1611
"Ariosto's SEVEN PLANETS gouerning Italie. Or, his Satyrs in seuen famous discourses, &c. Newly corrected and augmented, &c. With a new edition of three most excellent ELEGIES, written by the same Lodovico Ariosto."
By W. Stan
by, 1611. 4to. I believe this title gave rise to the following.
"A Booke of the seuen planets, or seuen wandring motions of William Alablaster's wit, retrograded or removed by John Ra
ster."
Lond. 1598. 4to. There is an edition of this translation of Ariosto's Satires, 1608. See supr. vol. iii. 481.
It is more certain that Ariosto's title gave rise to
"The Philosophers Satyrs, or the Philosophers Seven Satyrs, alluding to the seuen Planets, &c."
By Robert Anton of Magdalene college, Cambridge. Lond. 1616. 4to. It may be sufficient to have mentioned these Satires here.
. I believe these satires are but little known or esteemed by the Italians.
For the sake of juxtaposition, I will here anticipate in throwing together the titles of some others of the most remarkable collections of satires and satirical epigrams, published between 1600 and 1620, meaning to consider hereafter those that best deserve, more critically and distinctly
I have seen
"N. Britland's BOURE OF DELIGHT, Contayning Epigrams, Pastorals, Sonnets, &c."
Printed for W. Jones 1597. But these Epigrams do not so properly belong to the class before us. The same may be said of the Epigrams of George Turberville, and some few others.
.
The
COURT OF CONSCIENCE,
or Dick Whipper's Sessions,
appeared in 1607.
More fooles yet,
a collection of Epigrams in quarto, by R. S. perhaps Richard Smith, in 1610.
The most elegant and wittie Epigrams
of sir James Harrington, the translator of Ariosto, in four books, in 1611
Many of Harrington's Epigrams were certainly written before. Perhaps there was an older edition. In Fitzgeoffrey's Latin Epigrams, called AFFANIAE, published 1601, there is an Epigram to Harrington, with these lines preferring him to Haywood or Davies, as an English epigrammatist. Signat. B. 3.
Sive arguta vago flectas epigrammata torno,
Sive Britanna magis sive Latina velis.
At tu Biblidicis malis comes ire Camenis,
Illis HAYWOODOS DAVISIOSQUE praeis.
And in sir John Stradling's Epigrams, published 1607, there is one to Harrington with this title, Lib. i. p. 32.
"Ad D. I. Harrington, Equitem doctissimum, de quibusdam epigrammatis Stradlingo, equiti, dono missis, 1590."
And in Stradling's epigrams, we have two of Harrington's translated into Latin.
. Jonson's EPIGRAMS, in 1616
Jonson's epigrams, as we have seen, are mentioned with Davies's, by Fitzgeoffrey, 1601. AFFAN. Lib. ii. Signat. E. 4.
DAVISIOS laedis mihi, JONSONIOSQUE lacessis.
Of this the first Davies, Harrington says,
"This Haywood [the epigrammatist] for his prouerbs and epigrams is not yet put down by any of our country, though one [Davies
in the margin]
doth indeede come neare him, that graces him the more in saying he put him downe, &c."
—
"A NEW DISCOVRSE of a stale svbiect, called the METAMORPHOSIS of AJAX, &c."
Printed 1596. 12mo. SIGNAT. D. 2. Again,
"But as my good friend M. Dauies saide of his Epigrams, that they were made like doublets in Birchen-lane, for euery one whom they will serue, &c."
Ibid. SIGNAT. I.
. Henry Fitzgeoffry's SATIRES in 1617
In Hayman's QUODLIBETS, or Epigrams, there is one,
"To the reverend, learned, and acute, Master Charles FitzGeoffrey, bachelor in diuinity, my especiall kind friend, and most excellent poet."
He compares him to Homer, being blind of one eye. B. i. 111. p. 18. This was Charles the author of the Latin Epigrams, abovementioned.
. PHILOMYTHIE or PHILOMYTHOLOGIE,
wherein outlandish birds, beasts, and fishes, are taught to speake true English plainely, By T.
SCOT.
gentleman,
including satires in long English verse, in 1616
This is a second edition,
"much inlarged,"
Lond. For Francis Constable, &c. 8vo.
.
The second part of
PHILOMYTHIE,
containing certaine Tales of True Libertie, False Friendship, Power United, Faction and Ambition,
by the same, 1616
For Constable. ut supr.
.
Certaine Pieces of this age parabolized,
by the same, in 1616
Lond. Printed by E. Griffin, for F. Constable, &c. 8vo. I suppose these two last to be second editions.
. George Wither, of Manydowne in Hamshire, educated at Magdalene College, in Oxford, and at Lincolns inn, afterwards an officer in Cromwell's army, and popular even among the puritans as a poet, published ABUSES
stript and whipt,
or
Satyricall Essayes. Divided into two Bookes.
in 1613
Three editions soon followed, 1614, 1615, 1622, 8vo.
. For this publication, which was too licentious in attacking establishments, and has a vein of severity unseasoned by wit, he suffered an imprisonment for many months in the Marshalsea. Not being debarred the use of paper, pens and ink, he wrote during his confinement, an apology to James the first, under the title of A SATYRE, printed the following year, for his censures of the government in his first book. But, like Prynne in the pillory railing at the bishops, instead of the lenient language of recantation and concession, in this piece he still perseveres in his invectives against the court
Reprinted 1615, 1622, 8vo.
. Being taken prisoner in the rebellion, by the royalists, he was sentenced to be hanged; but sir John Denham the poet, prevailed with the king to spare his life, by telling his majesty,
So long as Wither lives, I shall not be the worst poet in England.
The revenge of our satirist was held so cheap, that he was lampooned by Taylor the water-poet
The titles of Wither's numerous pieces may be seen in Wood, ATH. OXON. i. 392. seq. He was born in 1588, and died in 1667. He has left some anecdotes of the early part of his life, in the first book of his ABUSES, &. The OCCASION, p. 1. seq. In Hayman's Epigrams, 1628, there is one,
"To the accute Satyrist, Master George Wither."
EPIGR. 20. And 21. p. 61.
Here might be mentioned,
"ESSAYES and CHARACTERS, ironicall and instructive, &c, By John Stephens the younger, of Lincolnes inne, Gent."
Lond. 1615. 12mo. Mine is a second impression. Many of the ESSAYES are Satires in verse.
There is also a collection of Satyrical poems called the KNAVE OF HEARTS, 1612. Another, the KNAVE OF SPADES, 1611. And
"Knaves yet, The Knaves of Spades and Diamonds. With new additions,"
1612. 4to. Among Mr. Capell's SHAKESPERIANA, at Trinity college, Cambridge, are
"Dobson's Dry Bobs,"
1610, Bl. Let
. 4to. And Heath's EPIGRAMS, 1610. 8vo.
. Richard Brathwayte, a native of Northumberland, admitted at Oriel college, Oxford, in 1604, and afterwards a student at Cambridge, chiefly remembered, if remembered at all, as one of the minor pastoral poets of the reign of James the first, published in 1619,
"NATVRES embassie, or the Wilde-mans measures, danced naked, by twelve Satyres, with sundry others, &c
For R. Whitcher, 12mo. They were reprinted for the same, 1621. 12mo. In his satire on ADULTERIE, are these lines, p. 30.
And when you haue no favours to bestow,
Lookes are the lures which drawe Affection's bow.
To these pieces is annexed,
"The second Section of Divine and Morall Satyres, &c."
This is dedicated to S. W. C. by R. B. See also Brathwayte's STRAPPADO
for the Devil,
1615. 8vo.
."
—Donne's SATIRES were written early in the reign of James the first, though they were not published till after his death, in the year 1633. Jonson sends one of his Epigrams to Lucy Countess of Bedford, with MR. DONNES SATYRES
EPIGR. xciii. See xcvi. Though Jonson's EPIGRAMS were printed in 1616, many were written long before. And among Freeman's Epigrams, RUN AND A GREAT CAST, 1614, we have the following. EPIGR. 84.
TO JOHN DONNE.
The STORME described hath set thy name afloat,
Thy CALME a gale of famous winde hath got:
Thy SATYRS short too soone we them o'erlook,
I prithee, Persius, write another booke!
. It is conjectured by Wood, that a lively satirical piece, on the literature of the times, which I have already cited, with Donne's initials, and connected with another poem of the same cast, is one of Donne's juvenile performances. I had supposed John Davies. But I will again exhibit the whole title of the Bodleian edition.
"A Scourge for paper-persecutors, by I. D. With an Inquisition against paper-persecutors, by A. H. London, for H. H. 1625,"
in quarto. But Wood had seen a detached edition of the former piece. He says,
"Quaere, whether John Donne published
A Scourge for Paper Persecutors,
printed in quarto, tempore Jacobi primi. The running title at the top of every page is PAPER'S COMPLAINT, in three sheets and a half. The date on the title pared out at the bottom
ATH. OXON. i. 556. [See above, p. 81.] He thus ridicules the minute commemoration of unhistorical occurrences in the Chronicles of Hollinshead and Stowe. Signat. B. 3.
Some chroniclers that write of kingdom's states,
Do so absurdly sableize my white
With maskes, and interludes, by day and night,
Bald may games, beare baytings, and poore orations,
Made to some prince, by some poore corporations.
And if a bricke-bat from a chimney falls,
When puffing Boreas nere so little bralls;
Or wanton rig, or leacher dissolute,
Doe stand at Paules-crosse in a sheeten sute:
All these, and thousand such like toyes as these,
They close in Chronicles like butterflies.
And so confound grave matters of estate
With plaies of poppets, and I know not what.—
Ah good sir Thomas More, fame be with thee,
Thy hand did blesse the English historie!—
As also when the weathercock of Paules
Amended was, this chronicler enroules, &c.—
."
This must have been an older edition, than that in which it appears connected, from similarity of subject, with its companion,
An Inquisition against paper-persecutors,
in the year 1625, as I have just noticed.
Owen's idea of an epigram points out the notion which now prevailed of this kind of composition, and shews the propriety of blending the epigrams and satires of these times, under one class. A satire, he says, is an epigram on a larger scale. Epigrams are only satires in miniature. An epigram must be satyrical, and a satire epigrammatical
Robert Hayman above quoted, thus recommends his own Epigrams. QUODLIBETS, B. iv. 19. p. 61.
Epigrams are like Satyrs, rough without,
Like chesnuts sweet; take thou the kernell out.
. And Jonson, in the Dedication of his EPIGRAMS to Lord Pembroke, was so far from viewing this species of verse, in its original plan, as the most harmless and inoffensive species of verse, that he supposes it to be conversant above
the likenesse of vice and facts,
and is conscious that epigrams
carry danger in the sound.
Yet in one of his epigrams, addressed TO THE MEERE ENGLISH CENSVRER, he professes not exactly to follow the track of the late and most celebrated epigrammatists.
To thee my way in EPIGRAMMES seemes newe,
When both it is the old way and the true.
Thou saist that cannot be: for thou hast seene
DAVIS, and WEEVER, and the BEST have BEENE,
And mine come nothing like, &c
EPIGR. xviii. Freeman also celebrates Davis, RUN AND A GREAT CAST, 1614. 4to. EPIGR. 100.
Haywood wrote Epigrams, and so did Davis,
Reader, thou doubtest
utrum horum mavis.
In Dunbar's Latin Epigrams, published 1616, there is a compliment to Davies of Hereford, author of the SCOURGE OF FOLLY, as a Satyrist or epigrammatist. CENT. xx. p. 66.
.
This, however, discovers the opinion of the general reader.
Of the popularity of the epigram about the year 1600, if no specimens had remained, a proof may be drawn, together with evidences of the nature of the composition, from Marston's humourous character of Tuscus, a retailer of wit.
But roome for Tuscus, that iest-moungering youth,
Who neer did ope his apish gerning mouth,
But to retaile and broke another's wit.
Discourse of what you will, he straight can fit,
Your present talke, with,
Sir, I'll tell a iest,—
Of some sweet ladie, or grand lord at least.
Then on he goes, and neer his tongue shall lie,
Till his ingrossed iests are all drawne dry:
But then as dumbe as Maurus, when at play,
Hath lost his crownes, and paun'd his trim array.
He doth nought but retaile iests: breake but one,
Out flies his table-booke, let him alone,
He'll haue it i' faith: Lad, hast an EPIGRAM,
Wil't haue it put into the chaps of Fame?
Giue Tuscus copies: sooth, as his own wit,
His proper issue, he will father it, &c
Sc. VILLAN. B. iii. 11.
.
And the same author says, in his Postscript to PIGMALION,
Now by the whyppes of EPIGRAMMATISTS,
I'll not be lash'd.—
One of Harrington's Epigrams, is a comparison of the Sonnet and the Epigram.
Once by mishap two poets fell a squaring,
The Sonnet and our Epigram comparing.
And Faustus hauing long demur'd vpon it
Yet at the last gaue sentence for the Sonnet,
Now, for such censvre, this his chiefe defence is,
Their sugred tast best likes his likrous senses.
Well, though I grant sugar may please the tast,
Yet let my verse haue salt to make it last
EPIGR. B. i. 37.
.
In the RETURN FROM PARNASSUS, acted 1616, perhaps written fome time before, Sir Roderick says,
"I hope at length England will be wise enough: then an old knight may haue his wench in a corner, without any SATIRES or EPIGRAMS
A. ii. S. 2.
."
In Decker's VNTRUSSING OF THE HUMOROUS POET, Horace, that is Jonson, exclaims in a passion,
"Sirrah! I'll compose an EPIGRAM vpon him shall go thus—
Edit. 1602. Sign. C. 2. Again, ibid.
"Heere be EPIGRAMS upon Tucca."
E. 3.
"They are bitter EPIGRAMS composed on you by Horace."
F. 3.
"A gentleman, or honest citizen, shall not sit in your pennie-bench theaters with his squirrell by his side cracking nuttes, but he shall be SATYRED and EPIGRAMMED upon, &c."
H. 3.
"It shall not be the
whippinge o' th' satyre
nor the whipping of the blind beare, &c."
L. 3.
"He says here, you diuulged my EPIGRAMS."
H.
"And that same PASQUILLS-MADCAP nibble, &c."
A.
."
INDEX TO THE THIRD VOLUME OF WARTON'S History of English Poetry.
A. R. 480, 483
Abbot, Archbishop, 487
Achelly, or Acheley, Thomas, 281
Acricious,
Ball
t of,
417
Active Policy of a Prince,
a Poem,
by George Ashby, 81
Acts of the Apostles,
translated into Englyshe metre
by Dr. C. Tye, 190, 191, 192, 193, 468
Acts of the Popes by Bale,
translated
by Studley, 384
Aesop, 347, 449
Aelian's various History,
translated
by Abraham Fleming, 403
Aeneidos of Virgil
translated.
See Virgil.
Affaniae, by Charles Fitzjeffrey, 281
Affectionate Shepherd, by Barnefield, 405
Agamemnon, Seneca's
Tragedy of, translated
by Studeley, 290, 383, 417
Aged Lover renounceth Love,
a Poem,
by Lord Vaulx, 45
Agon Heroicus, by Edmund Bolton, 278
Agriculture, Spiritual, 458
Agrippa, Cornelius, 7
Alan, Cardinal, 276
Albion's England, by Warner, 272, 273, 277
Alcione and Ceyx. 413
Alcoran of the Prelates, by John Bale, 79
Ales,
various kinds, Account of,
128, 129
Alexander, Geste of, by Adam Davie, 112, 124, 126, 127, 128, 132
Alexander and Campaspe,
Play of,
423
Alexander, Campaspe, and Apelles, 423
Alexius, 466
Alfayn
and Archelaus, the famooste and notable History of, 422
Allen, Edward, Founder of Dulwich College, 436, 475
Allot, Robert, 280, 281, 483
Alveare, by Baret, 404, 414
Amadis de Gaule,
Romance of,
425, 477, 488
Amours, with Sonnets by J. or G. D. and W. S. 402
Anatomy of Melancholy, by Burton, 295, 434
Andria of Terence,
translated
by Kyffin, 449
Andria of Terence,
Commentary on,
by M. Grimoald, 60
Anglorum Prelia,
a Latin Poem,
by Ocland, 314
Anne Boleyn, 28, 49, 58
Anslay, or Annesley, Brian, 79
Anstis, 279
Antichrist's Mas, or Mass, the Downsal of, 145
Antichrist, or the Papal Dominion,
a Poem on,
by Naogeorgius, or Kirchmaier, 458
Antigone of Sophocles,
translated,
433
Antiprognosticon of W. Fulk,
translated
by William Paynter, 465
Antonio, Nicholas, 476
Apelles and Pygmalyne, 423
Appelles,
Songe of,
423
Apius, Terannye of Judge,
a Poem,
416
Apology for Woman, by William Heale, 320
Apology of Pierce Penniless, 400
Apostolic Creed,
versified
by William Whyttingham, 168
Appius and Virginia,
Tragedy of,
416
Appolyn of Tyre,
Romance of,
142
Arbor of Ami
ie set foorth by Thomas Howell, 418
Arcaoeus, F. Anatomy, by, 181
Arca
dia, by Sidney, 419, 425, 496
Arcadian Rhetoricke by Fraunce, 406
Arc
te and Palamon,
Play of,
287, 290
Arch
propheta sive Johannes Baptista Tragedia; that i
, the Archprophet, or St. John the Baptist,
a Latin Tragedy,
by Nicholas Gr
moald, 60
Are
ine's War of Italy,
tra
slated,
413
Argonautica of Catullus, 407
Ariodanto and Jane
ra, daughter unto the Kynge of Scots, the tragicall and pleasaunte History of, by Peter Beverley, 479
Ariosto, 11, 25, 352, 485, 488
Arisbas, by J D. 417
Aristotle, 330. Table of the Ten Categories o
translated
by Googe, 458
Aristotle's Ethics,
Commentary on,
by Figlinei Fel
e, 24
Arnalt and Lucinda, a fyn Tuscane Hy
torye, 474
Arnolds, R
.
Chronicle,
by, 135
Arraignment of Paris, by Geo. Peele, 417, 418
Art of English Poesie, see Puttenham, 10, 44, 96, 213, 277, 293, 335, 400, 415, 426, 499. Of French Poetry, 350, 351
Art of Logic, by Wilson, 298, 331
Art of Rhetoric, by Wilson, 91, 331, 332 339 to 344
Art de Rhetorique,
in French Ryme,
348
Art et Science de Rhetorique,
metrifiée
par N. Viellard. 348
Arthur, an Armorican Knight,
H
story of, translated
by Lord Berners, 58
Arthur, King,
History of,
123, 341
Arthur of Little Brittayne,
Romance of,
477
Arthure, Prince, by R. R. i. e. Richard Robinson, 391
Arundel, Philip, Earl of, 421
Ascham, Roger. 24, 300, 329, 330, 331, 415, 441, 461, 491
Ashby, George, 81
Ashmole, Elias, Theatrum Chemicum, by. 85
Asserterio Arthuri of Leland,
translated
by Robinson, 391
Astionax and Polixine, 417
Assault of Cupide upon the Fort in which the Lover's Heart lay wounded,
a Poem
by Lord Vaulx, 45, 49
As
le, 30
Atchlow, a Player, 436
Athanasian Creed,
versified
by W. Whyttingham, 169. By Hunnis, 180
Atropoion De
ion,
a Poem,
392
Aubrey, 26
Auctours, uncertain, 28, 41
Audley, Lord Chancellor,
Poem on the Death of,
46
Aulica, de, by Gabriel Harvey, 426
Aurelio and Isabella,
Romance of,
477
Aurelius, Marcus, Golden Boke of, by Lord Ber
ers, 279
Ausonius, Epigrams of,
translated
by Kendall, 432
B
B. N. See Nicholas Breton.
B. T. 290, 390
B. W. 448
Babtism and Temptation,
an Interlude,
by John Bale, 78
Bacon
Sir Nicholas, 336
Bais, Lazare de, 35
Baldwyn, William, 181, 212, 213, 214, 267, 317
Bale, John, 43, 58, 61, 78, 83, 195, 198, 206, 213, 316
Bancroft,
Archbishop,
488
Bandello, 470, 484
Banishment of Cupid, 402, 477
Banockburn,
a Poem,
by Laurence Minot, 107
Banquet of Daintie Conceiptes, 485
Bansley, Charles, 84
Barcham, Dr. John, 279
Barnefielde, Richard, 405
Barrett, John, 404, 414
Bartholomeus, 487
Bastard, Thomas, 281
Bathsabe and David,
Play of,
by Geo. Peele, 328
Batman, or Bateman, Dr. Stephen, 450, 487
Batman's Doom, 487
Batrachomuomachy of Homer,
translated
by Chapman, 445
Batrachomuomachy of Homer,
imitated
by John Heywood, 95
Batrachomuomachy of Homer,
translated
by Dr. Johnson, 433
Bavande, William, 274
Bayes,
Poem on,
51
Beard, D.
Theatre of God's Judgements,
by, 289, 437
Beau Miracle de S. Nicolas,
French Play of,
325
Beaumont, Francis, 279, 280, 419
Bede, 248
Bedwell, William, 103
Beearde, Richard, 319
Bell, David, 450
Bellay, 352
Belleforest, 487
Belvedere, or Garden of the Muses, by John Bodenham, 280
Bembo, Pietro, 352
Bentley, 436
Bernard, Richard, 449
Berners, Lord, 42, 58, 147, 279
Besalin, Ramon, Vidal de, 349
Betham's Military Precepts, 396
Beverly, Peter, 479
Bevis of Southampton,
Romance of,
141
Beza, Theodore, 162, 432
Bible,
translated
by William Bedwell, 103
Bird, William, 58, 59
Blase, Bishop, 353
Blasts of Retrait from Plaies,
the Seconde and Third,
288
Blazon of Jealousie, by R. T. 481
Blessedness of Brytaine,
a Poem,
by Kyffin, 449
Blomefield, William, 84, 85, 86
Blomefield's Blossoms, or Campe of Philosophy, 85
Blount's Ancient Tenures, 73
Blundeville, or Blondeville, Thomas, 274
Boar's Head,
Custom of the,
143
Boccace's Epistle to Pinus,
translated
by Lord Surrey, 26
Boccace, 99, 216, 251, 352, 458, 464, 465, 467, 468, 470, 484, 488
Bodenham, John, 280
Boleyne, Anne, 28, 49, 58, 152
Boleyne, Geo. Viscount Rochford, 41, 42, 43, 57
Bolton, Edmund, 24, 275, 276, 278
Bonner, Bishop, 28
Borbonius's Epigrams,
translated
by Kendall, 432
Borde, Andrew, 70, 71, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 77, 78, 337
Boy, Bishop,
Ceremony of the,
302, 303, 304, 321, 322, 323, 324, 325
Bouchier, John, Lord Berners, 42, 58, 147, 279
Brandon, Charles and Henry,
Account of,
342.
Epitaphia on,
by Wilson, 432
Breton, Nicholas, 402, 485
Breviary of Health, by Andrew Borde, 70, 77
Breviarie of Britaine, by T. Twyne, 396
Brian, Sir Francis. See Bryan.
Brice, Thomas, 355
Briggam, or Brigham, Nicholas, 353
Brimsley's Translation of Virgil's Bucolics, and Fourth Georgic, 404
British Muse, by Thomas Hayward, 281
Broadgate Hall, Oxford,
Account of,
90
Brooke, Thomas, 272. Arthur, 471, 472
Brown, Prebendary of Westminster, 396
Brunetto's Tesoretto, and Tesoro, 237, 254
Brunne, Robert de, 127
Bruno's Epigrams,
translated
by Kendall, 432
Brunswerd, John, 192
Bryan, Sir Francis, 28, 34, 41, 42, 57
Buchanan, 70
Bucer, 179, 450
Bucolics of Virgil,
translated.
See Virgil
Buckhurst, Lord. See Sackville Thomas
Bullocar, William, 346
Burton, John, alias Robert, 295, 425, 434, 471, 483
Buryal and Resurrection of Christ,
an Interlude,
by Bale, 78
Burying of the Masse,
in Rithme,
197
Buttis, Doctor, 78
Bussy d'Amboise,
Tragedy of,
by Chapman, 448
Byron, Charles, Duke of,
a Play,
447
C
C. H. i. e. Henry Chettle, 291
C. H. i. e. Henry Constable, 292
C. I. 170, 469
Caesar's Commentaries,
translated
by Golding, 414. By Tiptoft, Earl of Worcester, 414
Calvin, John, 164, 169, 179
Caltha Poetarum, 488
Cambyses,
Play of,
by Preston, 289
Camden, William, 384, 401
Campaspe and Alexander,
Play of,
423
Campbell, Dr. 281
Campe of Philosophy, 85
Campion, Edmund, 290, 291, 401. Thomas, 469
Campo di Fior, or the Flourie Field of Four Languages of M. Claudius Desainliens, 465
Canterbury Tales by Chaucer, 203
Canticles of Solomon,
versified,
181.
Metrical Commentary on,
by Dudley Fenner, 317.
In English Verse,
by Spenser, 317
Carew, Sir Nicholas, 58
Carlile, Christopher, 450
Carman's Whistle,
a Ballad,
292
Carols,
Account of,
142, 143, 144, 306, 307
Carowles, certayne goodly, to be songe to the Glory of God, 306
Carr, Nicholas, 334
Carter, Peter, 429
Case is Altered,
Play of,
291
Castiglio's il Cortegiano,
translated
by Thomas Hoby, 371
Castle of Love,
translated from the Spanish
by Lord Berners, 58
Castle of Memorie,
translated
by William Fullwood, 345
Catechismus Paulinus, by Mulcaster, 346
Catherine, Saint,
Play of,
323
Cato, 449
Catullus, 407
Cave, Henry, Narration of the Fall of Paris Garden, by, 289
Cavyll, or Cavil, 215, 270
Caxton's Ovid, 57. Epilogue to Chaucer's Book of Fame, 353
Cecil, Sir William, 24
Ceiris, a Fable of Nisus and Scylla, 406
Cent Nouvelles Nouvelles, les, 475
Cent Histoires Tragiques of Belleforest, 487
Cephalus and Procris, 417
Certaine Noble Storyes, 484
Certain Meters by Sir Thomas More, 98
Ceyx and Alcione,
Historie of, drawn into English Meeter
by William Hubbard, 413
Chaloner, Sir Thomas, 396, 464
Chance of the Dolorous Lover,
a Poem,
by Christopher Goodwin, 84
Chanson à Boire, or Drinking Ballad,
the first,
206
Chaos of Histories, 484
Chapman, George, 276, 279, 281, 291, 434, 441, 442, 445, 446, 447, 448
Charles, Duke of Biron,
Play of,
447
Chatter
on, George, 450
Chaucer, Geoffry, 12, 25, 35, 56, 76, 81, 93, 103, 203, 276, 311, 327, 335, 353, 354, 415, 426, 436, 451, 464
Chertsey, Andrew, 80, 313
Chestre, Thomas, 133, 134
Chettle, Henry, 291, 292, 386, 436
Children of the Chapel Stript and Wipt, 288
Child Bishop,
Song of the,
321
Chopping Knives,
a Ballad,
292
Christian Friendship, by Newton, 392
Christ in his Twelfth Year,
Interlude of,
by John Bale, 78
Christmas Carols, 142, 143, 144, 306, 307
Christmas Recreations, by Robinson, 391
Chronicle of Brutes,
in English Verse,
by Arthur Kelton, 205, 206
Chronicle of the Emperors, by Richard Reynholds, 346
Chrysanalia, by A. Munday, 290
Chryso-Triumphos, a City Pageant, by A. Munday, 290
Churchyard, Thomas, 11, 214, 215, 260, 280, 281, 391, 421
Chyld, Bysshop,
Song of the,
321
Chytraeus,
Postils of,
413
Cicero, Marcus Tullius,
Poem on the Death of,
by N. Grimoald, 62
Cicero's Epistles,
translated
by Fleming, 404
Oration for the Poet Archias,
translated
by Drant, 431
Orations,
translated,
431
Dream of Scipio,
translated,
86
Cicero, 200, 330
Citie of Civilitie, 466
Citie of Dames,
a Comedy,
by Brian Annesley, 80
Clavell, John, 399
Clem Clawbacke and Prig Pickshanke,
Picture of,
370
Cleomenes and Juliet,
Historie of,
473
Clerc, John, 26
Clere, Sir Thomas,
Poetical Epitaph on,
by Lord Surrey, 26
Clerke of Tranent, his Scotch Version of the Exploits of Gawaine, 133
Clitophon and Leucippe, 448
Cloris, or Complaynt of the Passion of the Despised Sheppard, by W. Smyth, 402
Cognatus Gilbertus, 416
Collection of Choice Flowers, by Fitzgëffry, 281
Collins, William, 81, 292, 478
Coluthus's Rape of Helen,
translated
by Marlowe, 433
Comoedia,
a Worke in Rhyme,
by H. N. 202
Commandments,
versified
by Whyttingham, 169
Commedia il Divina, di Dante, 236, 237, 238, 239 to 255
Commendacion of True Poetry, 486
Commune Desunctorum, by Stanyhurst, 401
Complaint against the Stiff-necked Papists,
in Verse,
by Mardiley, 194
Complaint,
a Poem,
ascribed to Anne Boleyn, 58
Complete Angler, 438
Comus,
Masque of,
by Milton, 22
Confessio Amantis, 353
Consutation of Miles Hoggard, by Crowley, 197
Consutation to the Answer of a Wicked Ballad, 197
Constable, Henry, 277, 280, 281, 286, 292, 386
Conway, Sir John, 479
Cooper, John, 469
Copland, Robert, 180, 313
Coprario, or Cooper, John, 469
Corbet, Bishop, 170
Cosen
, Dr. 189
Council of the High Priests,
an Interlude,
by John Bale, 78
Court of Venus,
moralised,
355
Courte of Virtue, by J. Hall, 181, 424
Coverdale's Bible, 172
Courtier of Castilio,
translated,
211, 371
Courtier's Life, by Sir Thomas Wyat, 37, 38
Cox, Leonarde, Tract on Rhetorick, by, 331
Cowper, the Fearfull Fantyses of the Florentyne, 477
Coxeter, Thomas, 281, 401, 410, 415,
, 422, 431, 433
Cranmer, Archbishop, 198, 204
Creeds, the Nicene, Apostolic, and Athanasian,
versified
by Whyttingham and Clement Marot, 168
Cromwell, Thomas, Lord,
a ballad on,
144
Cromwell, Oliver, 164
Cronicle of the Brutes,
in English Verse,
by Arthur Kelton, 205, 206
Crowley, Rob. the Printer, 187, 188, 197
Cruel Detter, by Wayer,
a Ballet,
423
Cruget, Claude, 481
Cuckowe, William, 292
Culex, by Spenser, 406
Cundyt of Comfort, by Fleming, 404
Cupid, Banishment of,
a Romance,
477
Cupid and Psyche,
Play of,
288
Cupydo, serten Verses of, by Mr. Fayre, 396
Cupid's Whirligig,
Play of,
484
Cymon and Iphigenia, 469
Cynthia and Cassandra, by Barnefield, 405
Cyropoedia,
English Version of,
by Grimoald, 61
D
D. G. 402
D. J. 314, 402
D. R. 259
D. T. 430. See Thoma
Deloney
Damon and Pythias,
Play of,
by Edwards, 284, 289
Damonde and Pi
hias,
Tragical Comedye of,
289
Daniel, Samuel, 272, 276, 280, 281, 400, 447
Dante, 11, 236, 237, 238, 239, 240, 241, 242, 243, 244, 245, 246, 247, 248, 249, 250, 251, 252, 255, 453, 464
Darius, King,
Play of,
328
David and Bethsabe,
Play of,
by George Peele, 67, 328
David and Goliah,
Story of,
exhibited in Dumb Show, 350
Davi
, Adam, 112, 124, 126, 128, 132
David's Psalms,
translated,
&c. See Psalms
David, Kinge,
a newe Interlude on the tw
Sy
nes of,
328
Davies, Sir John, 280, 488
Davison's Poems, 32
Day, John, the Printer, 182
Decameron of Boccace, 487, 488
Deceipts in Love,
discoursed in a Comedie of two Italian Gentlemen,
and translated into English, 485
Decker, or Dekker, Thomas, 281, 292, 426, 430, 436, 488
Declaration of God's Judgements at Paris Garden, by John Field, 288
Dee, John, 396, 478
Defence of Poetry, by Sir P. Syney, 273, 363
Defence of Women, by E. More, 320
Deloney, Thomas, 430
Democritus, Junior, 295. See Burton
Demosthenes, Seven Orations of,
translated
by T. Wilson, 334; by Carr, 384
Denny, Sir Anthony,
Poem on the Death of,
46
Dering, Edward, 466
Description of the Restlesse State of a Lover,
a Poem,
by Lord Surrey, 19
Descriptio Hiberniae, 401
Devereux, Richard,
Poem on the Death of,
46
Diamant of Devotions, by A. Fleming, 404
Diana, or the excellent Conceitful
Sonnets
of H. C. 292
Diana of Montmayer,
Romance of,
translated from Spanish by Tho. Wilson, 344
Diall for Daintie Darlings, 485
Dialogue against the Pope, by Ochin,
Englished
by Poynet, 188
Dialogue on Proverbes, by J. Heywood, 91
Dialogue on Tribulation, by Sir Thomas More, 329
Dickenson, 417
Didaco and Violenta,
Tragical History of,
422
Dido,
Tragedy of,
by Edw. Haliwell, 84
Dido, Queen of Carthage,
Tragedy of,
by Christopher Marloe, 435
Dido and Eneas,
Interlude of,
435
Diella, certaine Sonnets adjoyning to the Amorous Poeme of Dom Diego and Gineura, by R. L. Gentleman, 480
Dietarie of Health, by Andrew Borde, 77
Dietarie for the Clergy, 204
Dingley, Francis, 261
Discoverie of Campion the Jesuit, 290, 291
Discourse of English Poetrie, by Webbe, 44, 291, 400
Doctrine of Urines, by Andrew Borde, 77
Dodipoll, Doctor, the Wisdom of,
a Play,
475
Dodington, Bartholomew, 384
Dolce, 482
Dolman, John, 215
Doni's Morall Philosophie, from the Italian, by Sir T. North, 273
Donne, John, 278, 279, 424
Doom, by Batman, 487
Downsal of Antichrist's Masse, 145
Downsal of Diana of the Ephesians, 314
Dramata Sacra, by Oporinus, 458
Drant, Thomas, 320, 386, 424, 425, 426, 427, 428, 429, 431, 450
Drayton, Michael, 3, 11, 14, 41, 76, 263, 264, 266, 270, 272, 277, 280, 433, 435, 445
Dream of Scipio, Tully's, 86
Drinking Ballad, the First, 206
Dryden, John, 443, 447, 470
Dumb Show,
Account of,
291, 350, 360, 361
Duke, Gilbert, 450
Dugdale's Monasticon, 153
Dyer, Sir Edward, 277
E
E. R.;
quaere,
R. C. i. e. R. Carew
Earthquake,
Account of,
in the Year 1580, by A. Golding, 414
Eastward Hoe,
Play of,
447
Ecclesiastes of Solomon,
versifyed
by Lord Surrey, 26, 182
Ecclesiastes,
versifyed
by Oliver Starchy, 320
Ecclesiastes,
versifyed
by John P
llaine, 316
Ecclesiastes,
versifyed
by Ed. Spenser, 320
Ecclesiastes,
versifyed
by Henry Lok, or Lock, 320, 445
Ecclesiastes,
versifyed
by Drant, 320, 429
Ecclesiasticus,
versifyed
by John Hall, 181
Edmonton, Merry Devil of,
Play of the,
81
Edward II.
Play of,
by Marlowe, 438
Edward III.
Poem on the Wars of,
by Minot, 103
Edward VI. 195
Education, a Compendious Fourm of, &c.
in Verse,
by E. Hake, 275, 276
Edward
, Richard, 283, 285, 286, 290, 291, 292, 293, 294, 296, 297
Elizabetha, a Latin Poem, by Christopher Ocland, 314
Elucidarium, 81
Elementarie, by Mulcaster, 346
Elizabeth, Queen, 277, 287, 394, 418, 425, 493
Elisabeth, Queen,
a rueful Lamentation on the Death of,
by Sir Thomas More, 99, 100, 101, 102
Emare,
Lay, or Romance of,
117, 134
Enchiridion of Surgery, by Gale, 181
Endimion and Phoebe, 418
Eneidos of Virgil,
translated.
See Virgil
Enemy of Idleness, by Fullwood, 345
England's Parnassus, 280, 440, 469, 483
England's Helicon, 292, 319, 402
English Policie,
a Poem,
123
Englishman's Roman Life, by Ant. Mundaye, 290
Ennius, 431
Enterlude for Boyes to handle and passe Tyme at Christmas, 307
Enterludes
prohibited,
198
Entertainment at Killing worth Castle, 98
Epictetus, 459
Epigrammata Seria, by Parker, 432
Epigrams, by J. Heywood, 88; by Crowley, 188
Episcopus Puerorum, 302, 303, 304, 321, 322, 325
Erasmus, 59, 404
Erra Pater, 77
Esdras and Darius,
Play of,
328
Esop's Fables,
translated
by Bullocar, 347
Esop,
translated
by Bullokar, 347, 449
Essex, Robert, Earl of, 421, 422
Ester, Queen,
Play of,
328
Esther, Book of,
versified
by John Pullaine, 316
Ethics of Aristotle,
Commentary on,
by Fignilei Felice, 24
Ethiriden, George, 284
Etiocles and Polynices,
Tale of,
386
Evans, Lewis, 425
Eunuchu
of Terence,
translated,
449
Euryalus and Lucretia, 416
Eustathius, 444
Exhortations to the Citizens of London,
a Poem,
by Lord Surrey, 26
Exposition on the Psalms, by Thomas Wilson, 345
Exposition on the Proverbs, by Thomas Wilson, 345
Expedition into Scotlande, of the most woorthely fortunate Prince, Edward, Duke of Somerset, by William Patten, 213
F
F. A. 403. See Abraham Fleming.
Fabell's Merry Pranks, 82
Fabri Pierre, or Le Fevre, 350
Fabyl's Ghoste,
a Poem,
81
Fagius, 179
Fairsax, Edward, 281, 485
Faire. See Phaier
Fairy Queen, by Spenser, 87, 234, 262, 409, 445, 498
Falcon and the Pie,
a Poem,
by Robert Vaughan, 106, 107
Fall and Evil Success of Rebellion,
a Poem,
by Wilfrid Holme, 83
Fall of Princes, by Lidgate, 217
Family of Love, 202
Fansie of a Wearied Lover, by Howard, Earl of Surrey, 8
Farmer, Dr. 482
Fasti, 415
Faust, John, 4
7
Faustus, Dr.
Play of,
437
Faustus, Dr.
Ballad on the Life and Death of
the Great Congerer, 437
Fearfull Fantyses of the Florentine Cowper, 477
Fenner, Dudley, 317
Fenton, Edward, 481, Geffray, 479, 480, 481
Ferdinando, Jeronimi,
Tale of,
474
Ferrers, George, 212, 213, 218, 293, 294, 414. Edward, 213, 285, 293
Ferrex and Porrex,
Tragedy of,
356. See Gordobu
Ferris, Richard,
the dangerous Adventure of,
&c. 214
Feyld, or Field, Richard, 84
Fiametta of Boccace,
translated
by B. Giouanno del M. Temp, 467, 488
Field, John, 288. Richard, 84
Figlinei Felice, 24
Finnaeus Historica Litteraria, 26
First Frutes, by Florio, 465
Fitzgerald, Lord Gerald, 6
Fitzgerald, Lady Elizabeth, 6
Fitzgeffrey, Charles, 281
Fitzroy, Henry, Duke of Richmond, 2, 3
Five Hundred Points of Good Husbandrie, by Tusser, 303, 304, 305, 306
Fleming, Abraham, 402, 403, 404, 451, 460. John, 404.- Samuel, 402, 403
Fletcher, Giles, 432. Robert, 279, 317
Fleury, Jean, 470
Florio, John, 465
Florishe upon Fancie, by N. B. Nicholas Breton, 484
Florentine Cowper, 477
Florus,
English Version of,
by Bolton, 278
Flosculi of Terence, by Higgins, 259
Floure of God's Commandments, 80
Flowres of Epigrams, by Timothy Kendall, 432
Flower of Fame, compyled by Ulpia
Fulwell, 271
Fontaine, 161
Fontanini, 407
Forest, or Collection of Histories, by Fortescue, 481
Fornari, Simon, 352
Forrest of Fancy, 386
Forrest, Syr William, 311, 312, 313
Fortescue, Thomas, 481
Fortunate Isles,
Masque of,
by Ben Jonson, 76
Fortune, Boke of, by Sir Thomas More, 98
Fountaine of Ancient Fiction, by Richard Linche, 486
Four P's,
Play of,
88
Fox, 167, 354
Foxa, Je
re de, 349
Franc, Guillaume de, 164
Fraunce, Abraham, 281, 400, 405, 406, 420, 421
Frere and the Boye, 475
Frier Fox-Taile,
a Ballad,
292
Froissart, 123, 431
Frogs and Mice, 433, 445
Fulk, William, 465
Fullwood, William, 345
Fulwell, Ulpian, 271
Furio's Counsels and Counselors,
translated into English Verse
by Blundeville, 274
G
G. B. 422; i. e. Bernard Garter
G. H. 486
G. I. 289
G. N. See Nicholas Grimoald
G. W. 47, 357
Gar. Ber. 423; i. e. Bernard Gardiner, or Bernard Garter
Gadshill,
Ballad of,
by Faire, 399
Gager, Dr. 290, 320
Galathea,
Play of,
by Lilly, 406
Galesus, Cymon and Iphigenia,
pleasaunt and delightful Historie of,
by T. C. 469
Gallery of Gallant Inventions, 485
Gallus, Cornelius, 407
Gammer Gurtons Needle,
Comedy of,
208
Garter, Bernard, 423
Gascoigne, George, 44, 45, 67, 277, 281, 286, 290, 293, 346, 372, 382 to 386, 414, 426, 44
, 473, 474
Gaya Sciencia, Consistorio de la, sounded by Ramon Vidal de Besalin, 349
Gay Science,
Account of,
349
Genesis,
translated into English Ryme
by Hunnis, 180
Genesis, the First Chapter of,
Ballet of,
424
Gentle Craft, the, 430
Gentleness and Nobilitie,
Play of,
88
Geoffrey of Monmouth, 38, 278
Geography of P. Mela,
translated
by Golding, 414
George, Saint,
Play of,
326
Georgics of Virgil,
translated.
See Virgil
Geraldine, the Fair, 7, 16
Gerileon,
a Poem,
292
Geste of Alexander,
a Poem,
by Adam Davie, 112, 124, 126, 127
Giamboni, Bono, Tesoro of Brunetto,
translated into Italian
by, 237
Giavanno, B. del M. Temp. 467
Gilpin, Edward, 281
Giuletta, La, 471
Glaucus and Scylla, 418
God's Promises to Man,
Tragedy of,
by John Bale, 78
Godfrey of Bolloign,
an heroycall Poem
of S. Torquato Tasso,
Englished
by R. E.
quaere,
485
Godfrey of Bolloigne,
Interlude of,
with the Conquest of Jerusalem, 485
Golden Apple,
Ballet of,
417
Golden Boke, or Life of Marcus Aurelius,
translated
by Lord Berners, 42
Golden Booke of the Leaden Goddes, by Dr. Stephen Batman, 487
Golden Legend, 154
Golden Terge, by Sir D. Lyndsey, 50
Golding, Arthur, 290, 409 to 413, 414, 439, 441, 494
Goldingham, Henry, 414
Goodman, Dr. Christopher,
a Pamphlet against Queen Mary,
by, 305
Goodly Matter,
Play of,
326
Goodwin, Christopher, 84
Googe, Barnaby, 274, 290, 322, 405, 441, 449, 450
Gordobucke,
Tragedy of,
by Sackville, 67, 169, 277, 355, 356, 357, 358, 359, 360, 361, 362, 363, 364, 365, 366, 367, 368, 369, 370, 371
Gosson, Stephen, 288
Gotham, Mad Men of, 72
Got
eham, Kemp's Merymentes of the Men of, 475
Goujet, 350
Gower, 81, 203, 336, 353
Grafton's Chronicle, 213, 431
Grammar, English, by Bullocar, 347
Grantham, Henry, his translation of Scipio Lentulo's Italian Grammar, 465
Grant, Edward, Specilegium of the Greek Tongue, by, 402
Grant, 396
Gratalorus, 393
Gratian du Pont, 348
Gratulationes Valdinenses, by Gabriel Harvey, 426
Greene, Robert, 290, 291, 386, 436
Greenwich,
Devices shewn at,
157, 302
Gresield, Patient, 311
Gresield the Second,
a Poem,
by Syr Wm. Forrest, 311
Grevile, Fulke, Lord Brooke, 278
Grimoald, Nicholas, 60, 61, 62, 63, 64, 65, 66, 67, 68, 69
Groatsworth of Wit, by Robert Greene, 292, 386
Groundes of Good Huswisery, 425
Guazzo, Stephen, Civile Conversation of,
translated
by Bartholemew Yong and William Pe
tie, 466
Guevara, Antonio de, Golden Epistles of,
versifyed
by Fenton, 480
Guicciadini's
History, translated
by Fenton, 480
Guido de Columna, 409
Guichard et Sigismonde, 47
Guillaume de Franc, 164
Guls Hombook, 425, 426
Guy, Earl of Warwick,
Romance of,
141
H
H. A. i. e. Arthur Hall, 440
H. E. 275
H. R. 307
H. T. 417
Hackluyt's Voyages, 123
Haddon, Dr. Walter, 343, 432
Hake, Edward, 275, 426
Haliwell, Edward, 84
Hall's Satires, 272, 315, 317
Hall, Bishop Joseph, 272, 315, 317, 486. Arthur, 440. Eliseus, 181. Edward, 156. John, 181, 424
Hall's Chronicle, 154, 156, 214, 431
Hamanus,
a Latin Tragedy,
by Kirchmaier, 458
Hamlet,
Play of,
45, 289, 435, 501
Hampole, 86
Handfull of Hidden Secrets,
collected
by R. Williams, 485
Handfull of Honeysuckles, by William Hunnis, 180
Harpalus and Phyllida,
a Poem,
51, 52, 53, 54
Harrington, Sir John, 281, 389, 485
Harriots, Master, 442
Harrison's Description of Britain, 74, 93, 94
Harvey, Gabriel, 334, 382, 400, 426, 474, 475, 480, 488
Harvey's (Gabriel) Hunt is up, by T. Nash, 475
Hatcher, 298
Hathway, Richard, 291
Hatton, Sir Christopher, 376
Haunse, Everard, 291
Hawkins, Sir Thomas, 424
Hawkwood, Sir John,
Life and Death of,
66
Hayward, Thomas, 281
Hecuba of Euripides,
translated
into French by Lazare de Baëf, 351
Hecuba and the Ladies of Troy, Lamentation of,
a Ballad,
445
Heale, William, 320
Hearne, Thomas, 13, 71, 73, 76, 151, 178, 279, 328
Hebdomada, Mariana, 401
Hedly, Thomas, 477
Helen's Epistle to Paris,
a Ballet,
by B. G. 422
Helenae Raptus, or Helen's Rape, 433
Helicon, England's, 69, 292, 319, 402, 438
Heliodorus, Ethiopics of,
translated,
419, 420, 449, 496
Hellowes, Edward, 481
Hemidos,
ruefull Tragedy of,
by Robinson, 391
Henry IV. by Shakespeare, 399
Henry V.
Play of,
501
Henry and Emma,
a Poem,
by Prior, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141
Henry VIII.
Encomium in Greek Verse,
on, by George Etheredge, 284
Henry VIII. King,
, 58, 59, 203, 205
Heptameron of Civill Discourses, by Whetstone, 483
Hercules and his End,
Ballet of,
417
Hercules Oetaeus of Seneca,
translated
into Blank Verse by Q. Elizabeth, 394
Heresbach, Conrade, Treatise on Agrigulture, by,
translated
by Googe, 458
Hermaphroditus and Salmacus, by Peend, 416
Hermes,
Fable of,
404
Hero and Leander, 434
Hesiod's Works and Days, Second Book of,
translated
by Geo. Chapman, 446
Hether, Dr. William, 313
Heusius, or Hews, 442
Heuterus, 295
Heywood, Jasper, 273, 287, 290, 386, 388, 441. Thomas, 290, 418, 436; or Heiwood, John, 87, 96, 343, 347, 388
Hiberniae Descriptio, by Stanyhurst, 401
Hieronymo,
Tragedy of,
67
Higgins, or Higins, John, 259, 260, 261, 262, 263, 275, 28
Historical Parallel, by Bolton, 278
Histories, Chaos of, 484
Histriomastix, by Prynne, 314, 464
Hive full of Honey, by William Hunni
, 180
Hoby, Thomas, 371
Hoggard, Miles, 197, 319
Holcot's Dictionarie,
corrected,
&c. by Higgins, 259
Holland, 195. Hugh, 278, 279
Hollinshed, 47, 50, 159, 431, 493. Chronicle of,
supervised
by Fleming, 403
Holme, Wilfrid, 83
Holofernes,
Play of,
328
Homer, 24, 276, 395, 434, 440, 441
Odyssy,
translated into Spanish Blank Verse
by Gonsalvo Perez, 24
Illiad, by G. Chapman, 276, 441, 442. By Arthur Hall, 440
Honestie of this Age, by Barnabe Riche, 482
Honourable Prentice, 66
Hooker, John, 84, 276
Hopkins, John, 39, 167, 171, 173, 174, 175, 178, 180, 189, 275, 355, 455
Horace's Art of Poetry,
translated into French
by Pelletier, 352
Horace,
translated,
35, 352, 395, 424, 451
Horace, Epistles of,
Commentary on,
by N. Grimoald, 60
Horace's Satyres, two Books of,
translated
by Drant, 424
Horologium Principum, by Antonio Guevara,
translated
by Sir Thomas North, 273
Horne, Bishop of Winchester, 290
Howard, Henry. See Surrey, Lord
Howard, Henry, Earl of Northampton, 421
Howell, Thomas, 418
Hubbard, William, 413
Hudson, Thomas, 280, 281
Hues, Robert, 442
Hugh, Sir, of Bourdeaux, 58, 425
Hughes, Robert, 442
Humphry, Duke,
Legend of,
by C. Middleton, 483
Hundred Sonnets, or Passionate Century of Love, by Thos. Watson, 433
Hundred Merry Tales, 475
Hundred Poyntes of Evell Huswyfraye, 304
Hundred good Poyntes of Husboundry, &c. 304
Hunnis, William, 180, 370, 414
Hypercritica, by Bolton, 24, 276, 278
I
Jacob and Esau,
a newe, merry, and wittie Comedie,
328
Jack of Newbery, 430
James I. King, 173, 281
Jane Shore,
Tragedy of,
280
Jancura and Ariodanto, 479
Jardin de Plaisance et Fleur de Rhetorique, 347
Jason and Medea,
Story of, translated
by Nycholas Whyte, 409
Jealousie, Blazon of, 481
Jeptha, Judge of Israel,
a Ballad,
by Wm. Petowe, 434
Jeremiah,
translated,
424
Jeremye,
Lamentation of,
424
Jew of Malta,
Tragedy of,
by Marlowe, 392, 436
Ignoto, 438
Iliad of Homer,
translated.
See Homer
Illustria aliquot Anglorum Encomia, 391
Introduction of Knowledge,
a Poem,
by A. Borde, 73
Job,
Book of,
by Saint Jerome, 248
Job,
Book of, paraphrased
by Drant, 429
Jocasta of Euripides,
translated
by Geo. Gascoigne, 67, 372, 373, 374
Johan, Johan the Husband, Tyb the Wife, and Sir Johan the Preeste,
Play of,
88
Johnson, Dr. Christopher, 433
John, King,
Play of,
435
John the Babtist,
Comedy of,
by John
ale, 78
Jones, Inigo, 237, 447. John, 450
Jonson, Ben, 79, 129, 278, 279, 281, 291, 433, 435, 436, 447, 448
Jordi Messen, a Provencial Poet, 31
Jopas,
Song of,
by Sir Thomas Wyat, 38
Joseph, the tragedious Troubles, &c. of,
a Poem,
by Sir William Forrest, 312
Iphis, unfortunate Ende of,
versified,
413
Irish Hubbub, by B. Riche, 482
Iscanus, Josephus,
Poem on the Trojan War,
by, 61
Isocrates, 330
Isocrates, certen Orations,
translated
by Christopher Johnson, 433
Italia Liberata di Goti, by Trissino, 25
Italian Schoolemaister, 474
Ite in Vineam, or the Parable of the Vineyard,
Comedy,
by Lord Berners, 58
Itzwert, James, 450
Julian of Brentford,
the Testament of,
by R. Copland, 313
Judith,
Book of, versified
by Pullaine, 316
Judith and Holofernes,
Ballad of,
328
Juliet and Cleomenes,
History of,
473
Justinian, 160
Justin's History,
translated
by Golding, 414
Juvenal, 451
Ivychurch, Countess of Pembroke's, by Fraunce, 405
K
K. J. or John Kepyer, 418
K. W. i. e. William Kethe, 170, 305, 418
Keeper, John, 186, 418
Kelton, Arthur, Chronicle of Brutes, by, 205, 206
Kempe, William, 290, 430, 475
Kendall, Timothy, 404, 432
Kenilworth Castle, Princely Pleasures of, 129, 139, 293, 356, 414, 498
Kepyer, John, 186, 418
Kethe, William, 170, 305, 418
Kett's Norsolk Insurrection,
Latin Narrative of,
by Nevyl, 385
Kinwelmersh, Francis, 372, 374
Killingworth Castle, Entertainments at, 98, 139
Kinde-Hart's Dreame, by Henry Chettle, 291
King, Dr. Philip; alias Henry, 279
Kings,
Book of, versified,
190
Knack to Know a Knave,
a Comedy,
475
Knight
Conjuring, by Decker, 292
Knyght of the Burning Pestle,
a Play,
by Beaumont and Fletcher, 280
Knox, 168, 418
Kongs-Scugg Sio, or Royal Mirrour, 263
Kyd, Thos. 281
Kyffin, Maurice, 449
Kyng Appolyn of Tyre,
Romance of,
142
L
L. F. 420
L. R. 480, 482
La Croze, Histoire de la Vie et des Ouvrages de, 477
Lambarde, 385
Lambe, William,
Memorial of,
by A. Fleming, 404
Lament for the Death of the Makkari
, 133
Lamentation of Hecuba and the Ladies of Troy, 445
Lamentation of Jeremye, &c. 424
Lamentation of Troy for the Death of Hector, 445
Lamentation of Corydon for Love of Alexis, by A. Fraunce, 405
Lamentation of Amyntas for the Death of Phillis, 405
Laneham, 98, 139, 416
Lancelot du Lac,
Romance of,
242, 477
Latimer, Bishop,
Song on,
197
Lattini, Brunetto, 237
Lavaterus of Ghosts,
translated into English
by R. H. 307
Launval,
Romance of,
123, 133
Lay of Emare, 117, 134
Lay of Launval, 123, 133
Lay of the Erle of Tholouse, 122
Laws, the Three,
a Comedy,
by Bale, 198
Lear, King,
Play of,
379.
Lectionary of Cardinal Wolsey, 146
Lee, Lady Margaret,
Poem on the Death of,
69
Leland, John, 11, 29, 79, 160, 353, 429
Lent and Liberty,
Dialogue between,
by Crowley, 188
Lenten Stuff, by Nash, 434
Lentulo, Scipio, his Italian Grammar,
translated
by Henry Grantham, 465
Lepanto, by King James I. 277
Lewick, Edw. 468
Lhuyd, Humphrey, 396
Lidgate, John, 81, 99, 217, 275, 336, 353
Life of Man, a Description of the,
a Poem,
181
Life of Milliado, a British Knight, 476
Lillie, John, 290; or Lilly, 406, 416, 423
Lives of the Saints, 149
Lives and Sayings of Philosophers, &c. by W. Baldwyn, 212
Linch, Richard, 486
Litany,
translated into Ryme
by R. Crowley the Printer, 187
Lloyd, Lodowyke, 322, 390
Locke, or Lok, Henry, 280, 320, 445
Locrine,
Play of,
435
Lodge, Thomas, 280, 281, 288, 290
Logic, by Seton, 429
London Chaunticleres, 475
Lord of Misrule, 213, 293, 307
Lord's Prayer,
versified
by Whittingham, 168
Lord's Supper,
Interlude
of, by John Bale, 78
Love,
Play of,
88
Lover and the Jaye,
Treatise of, a Poem,
by Richard Feylde, 84
Love's Labour Lost,
Play of,
465
Lucan, First Book of,
translated
by C. Marlowe, 434
Lu
nda and Arnalt, 474
,
a Ballad
of the traiterous and unbrideled Crueltye of, executed over Eriphile, Daughter to Hortensia Castilion, of Genoway, in Italy, 485
Lucrece,
Rape of,
by Shakespeare, 416
Lucrece,
grievous Complaynt of, 415
Lucretia,
Poem on,
415, 416
etius 209, 308
L
dayre, 81
Lu
ra seu Epigrammata Juvenilia, by Parkhurst, 432
Luther, the Pope, Cardinal and Husbandman,
Balad of,
196
Luther, 164
Lusty Juventus,
an Enterlude,
by R. Wever, 200, 201
Lyndsey, Sir David, 50, 455
M
M. A. 290. i. e. Anthony Mundaye
M. J. 319. 485. See Jervis Markham
Macbeth,
Play of,
413
Machiavel, 470
Mad Men of Gotham,
Merry Tales of the,
72, 73
Magna Charta,
translated from the French into Latin and English,
by Geo. Ferrers, 213
Mamillia, by Greene, 402
Mantuan,
versified
by Turberville, 421
Marbeck, John, a Musician, 172, 194, 313
Marcus Aurelius, 279
Marloe, or Marlowe, Christopher, 280, 281, 392, 420, 433, 434, 435, 436, 437, 438, 439
Mardiley, John, 194
Margarite of Ambrica,
a Romance,
by Thomas Lodge, 481
Markham, Jervis or Gervaise, 281, 319, 485
Marot, Clement, 161, 163, 164, 167, 169, 177
Marshall, George, 319
Marston, John, 272, 280, 281, 318, 417, 437, 447, 486, 488
Martial, 20, 395, 432
Martorell, John, 476
Martyrs and Confessors, Register of,
in Metre,
by Thomas Brice, 355
Mary Magdalen, Repentance of,
an Interlude,
328
Mary, Queen of Scots,
a Poem,
by, 56
Mary, Queen,
Latin Life of,
by Samuel Fleming, 402
Mary, Queen,
Accession of, celebrated in a goodly Psalm,
by Rich. Beearde, 319
Mason, William, 438
Mason's English Garden, 310
Masques,
Account of the,
155, 156, 157
Mass of the Gluttons, by Bale, 79
Mass, the Antichrist's,
Downfal of,
149
May Day,
Comedy of,
by Chapman, 279
Mayden's Dreme,
a Poem,
by Christopher Goodwin, 84
Measure for Measure,
Play of,
483
Medea and Jason, 409
Medusa,
Ballet of,
418
Mela, Pomponius, Geography of,
translated
by Golding, 414
Meliado, Sir,
Life of,
476
Menaechmi of Plautus,
translated
by W. W. 449
Mendoza, Lopez de, his Proverbs,
translated
by Googe, 458
Merbeck, John. See Marbeck
Merchant of Venice,
Play of,
57, 483
Meres, Francis, 46, 213, 290, 345, 399, 401, 414, 432, 433, 441, 469, 473
Merlini Vitae et Prophetiae, 146
Merlyn,
Treatise of,
or his Prophecies in Verse, 146, 151
Mery Jest, &c. by Sir Thos. More, 97
Merie Devil of Edmonton,
Play of the,
81, 83
Mery Tales, Wittye Questions, and Quicke Answers, 484
Merry Andrew, 71
Merry Passages and Jeastes, 414
Merry Wives of Windsor,
Play of,
438
Messia, Petro de, 481
Meteranus, 350
Metrical Preface to Heywood's Thyestes, 273, 387
Metropolis Coronata,
a City Pageant,
by A. Munday, 290
Midas, King,
Ballad of,
417
Middleton, Christopher, 280, 281, 483
Midsummer Night's Dream, 417, 418, 435
Military Precepts, by Philip Betham, 396
Milton, John, 160, 240, 246, 247, 440
Minerva,
a Book of Emblems,
by Peacham, 299
Minot, Laurence, 103, 146, 148, 149, 150
Minstrels,
Account of,
302
Miracles, 325
Mirandula, John Picus,
Lyfe of, translated
by Sir Thomas More, 102
Mirrour for Magistrates, 99, 209, 213, 216 to 239, 251, 256, 279, 281, 282, 293, 294, 298, 339, 359, 361, 423
Mirrour of the Church of Saint Austin
of Abyngdon, 313
Mirrour for Magistrates of Cities, by Whetstone, 279, 289
Mirrour of the Mathematikes, 259
Mirrour of Mirth, by R. D. 259
Mirrour of Monsters, 259
Mirrour of Mirrours, 281
Moderation,
a Poem in Praise of,
by M. Grimoald, 67
Montanus, Ferrarius, 274
Monge, Negro, 349
Monthly Miscellany, or Memoirs for the Curious, the Muse's Mercury, 139
Month's Minde of Margaret, Countess of Richmond,
a Sermon,
by Bishop Fisher, 322
Moone, Peter, 319
Morando, the Tritameron of Love, 483
Moralities, 203, 350, 351, 352
More, Sir Thomas, 55, 56, 87, 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 136, 159,
, 399, 432. Edward, 320
Morley, Lord, Henry Parker, 85
Mornay's, Philip, Treatise on the Truth of Christianity,
translated
by Sir P. Sydney and A. Golding, 414
Morte D'Arthur, 119, 123, 462, 463
Morys, John, 145, 148, 151
Mother Redd Cappe, 484
Much Ado About Nothing,
Play of,
by Shakespeare, 201, 475
Mulcaster, Richard, 315, 346
Munday, a Musician, 172
Mundaye, Anthony, 290, 291, 292
Muses Library, 12
Muses Mercury, 139, improperly called the Monthly Miscellany
Musaeus,
translated,
395
Mustapha,
Tragedy of,
by Greville, Lord Brook, 278
Myce and the Frogges, 433, 434, 445
Mylner of Abington,
a ryght pleasant and merry History of the,
with his Wife, and his Faire Daughter, and of two Poor Scolars of Cambridge, 76
Mysteries, 203, 324, 325
N
N. H. 202
N. T. 370, 391. See Thomas Norton
N. T. 392. See Thomas Newton
Naenia, by Stephanus Surigonius, 353
Naogeorgii Regnum Papisticum, 458
Naogeorgii Regnum Antichristi, 322
ΝΑΟΓΕΟΡΓΟΣ, or Kirchmaier, 458
Narcissus, from Ovid,
translated into English Mytre,
417
Nash, Thomas, 280, 290, 291, 400, 434, 435, 488
Nastagio and Traversari,
the History of, translated out of Italian into English,
by C. T. 194, 468
Nazianzen, Gregory, his Greek Epigrams,
translated
by Drant, 429
New Caesar, or Monarchie depraved, by Bolton, 278
Nevil, Sir Edward, 156
Nevill's Kettu
, 429
Nevyle, Alexander, 290, 384
Newbery, Jack of, 430
Newce, or Nuce, Thomas, 384
Newe Sonettes and Pretty Pamphettes, 297
News oute of Kent,
a Ballad,
306
News out of Heaven and Hell, 306
Newton, Thomas, 76, 159, 261, 269, 315, 383, 390, 391, 392, 393
Niccols, Richard, 263, 264, 265, 266, 267, 268, 269, 270, 271, 294
Nice Valour,
Play of,
by Fletcher, 475
Nicene Creed,
versified
by W. Whyttingham, 168
Nicholas, Henry, 202
Nine Daies Wonder, by Kemp, 290, 430
Nine Worthies,
Pageant of the,
326
Nobilitie,
Treatise of,
by John Clerc, 26
Nomenclator of Adrian Junius,
translated
by Higgins and Fleming, 260
Norden's Speculum Britaniae, 76, 83
North, Sir Thomas, 273, 293
Northampton, Hen. Howard, Earl of, 421
Norton, Thomas, 169, 274, 355, 357, 370, 415
Norvicus, by Nevyl, 386
Nosegay, 423
No
Browne Mayde, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141
Nouvelles Nouvelles, les Cent, 475
Nuce, Thomas, 384
Nugae Antiquae, 59
Nugae, or Latin Epigrams, by Borbonius, 432
O
Ochin, 188
Ocland, Christopher, 314
Octavia, by T. N. or Thomas Nuce, 384
Odyssy of Homer,
translated into Spanish Blank Verse,
24
Oedipus,
Lamentable History of the Prynce
384
Oedipus of Seneca,
translated
by Neville, 290
Oenone to Paris, 420
Olave, Saint,
Play of the Life of,
326
Oldy
, William, 281
Opilio, or Lucas Shepherd, 316
Oporinus, Religious Interludes in Latin,
published
by, 327, 328
Orator, the,
written in French
by Alexander Silvayn, and
Englished
by L. P. or Lazarus Pilot, 482
Orlando Furioso, 352, 484
Orthographie,
Treatise of,
by Bullocar, 347
Othello,
Tragedy of,
287
Overbury, Sir Thomas, 419
Ovid, 57, 162, 409, 413, 415, 420, 421, 494
Ovid's Metamorphosis,
translated
by Golding, 409, 415; by Sandy
, 413; by Peend, 413
Ovid's Fasti,
translated,
415
Ovid's Ibis,
translated
by Thomas Underdown, 419
Ovid's Remedy of Love,
translated
by Underdown, 419; by Sir T. Overbury, 419; by Marlowe, 420
Ovid's Elegies,
translated
by Marlowe, 420
Ovid's Epistles,
translated,
57, 420, 421
Ovid's Banquet of Sauce, by Geo. Chapman, 446
Owen's Epigrams, 433
Oxford, Edw. Earl of, 290, 292
P
P. L. i. e. Lazarus Pilot, 482
P's, Four,
Play of the,
by John Heywood, 88
Pace, 26
Pageant of Popes, by T. S. 384
Pageantries, 151
Pageants, Nine, of the Stages of Life, contrived by Sir Thomas More, 101, 102
Paget, William, Lord, 299
Painter, William, 465, 466
Palace of Pleasure, 465
Palamon and Arcite,
Poem,
by Chaucer, 35, 416
Palamon and Arcite, 470,
Play of,
by Edwards, 284, 287
Palingenius, 274, 387, 405, 415, 449
Palladis Tamia. See Witt's Treasury—by Meres
Palmerin of England, 488
Pammachius,
Tragedy of, translated
by Bale, 79
Panoplie of Epistles, by Fleming, 404
Pan, his Pipe,
a Poem,
405
Papal Dominion, by Googe, 458
Parable of the Vineyard,
Comedy of the,
by Lord Berners, 58
Paradise of Dainty Devises, 44, 69, 181, 283, 287, 297, 322, 388, 396
Paragon of Pleasant Histories, or this Nutt was New Cracked, contayning a Discourse of a Noble Kynge and his Three Sonnes, 481
Pardoner and the Frere,
Play of,
88
Parker, Henry, Lord Morley, 85
Parker, Archbishop, 1, 181, 365, 385, 386, 487
Parkhurst, John, Bishop of Norwich, 432
Parlour of Pleasaunte Delyghtes, 485
Parnassus, England's, 280, 440, 469
Parsons, a Musician, 172
Pascale, Lodovico, 482
Pasquill's Madness,
a Poem,
425
Pasquill's Mad Cappe, 445, 484
Pasquill's Mad Cappe's Message, 484
Passion of Christ,
Play of the,
326
Passion of our Lord,
an Interlude,
by Bale, 78;
translated
by Chertsey, 80, 313
Passio Domini Jesu, by Gilbert Pilkington, 103
Passionate Shepherd to his Love, 438
Patch, Cardinal Wolsey's Fool, 88
Pater Noster,
versified
by Forrest, 313
Pathway to Military Practise, by Barnabie Riche, 482
Patient Gre
ield, 311
Patten, William, 213
Paynter, William, 465, 466
Peacham, Henry, 299
Peckham, Archbishop, 325
Peele, George, 67, 281, 328, 417, 418, 436
Peend, Thomas, 416, 417
Peleus and Thetis, 407
Pelle
ier, Jaques, 351, 352
Pembroke, Countess of,
Poem on the Death of,
46
Penelope's Webbe, 418
Penetential Psalms of David,
translated
by Sir Thos. Wyat, 39
Peny, Sir,
Romance of,
93, 94, 106
Perceforest,
Romance of,
477
Pericles, Prince of Tyre,
Play of,
280
Perez Gonsalvo, Homer's Odyssy,
translated into Spanish
by, 24
Perseus and Andromeda, 446
Perymus and Thybye, 417
Petite Palace of Petie, his Pleasure, 466
Petowe, Henry, 434. William, 434
Pettie, William, 466
Petrarch, 1, 11, 12, 25, 31, 40, 58, 162, 311, 352, 447, 463
Petrarch's Seven Penetential Psalms,
translated
by Chapman, 447
Phaier, or Phayer, Thomas, 214, 290, 395, 396, 397, 399, 410, 415, 441
Phebe and Endimion, 418
Phelyppis, or Philips, Sir Thomas, 46
Phillips, John, 11, 440. Robert,
Poem on the Death of,
46
Phillis and Flora,
Amorous Contention of,
by Chapman, 446
Philocasander and Elamira, the Fayre Ladye of Brytayne, 477
Philotas,
Comedie of,
88
Phist, William, Welspring of Wittie Conceights,
translated from the Italian
by, 308
Phoenix Nest, by R. S. 401, 402
Pictorius Epigrams,
translated
by Kendall, 432
Pie and Falcon,
a Poem,
106
Pierce Plainness, Seven Yeres Prentiship,
a Romance,
by H. C. i. e. Henry Chettle, 291
Pierce Plowman, 108, 128, 187, 196, 197, 336
Pilkington, Gilbert, 103
Pilot, Lazarus, 482, 48
Pinner of Wakefi
ld,
Comedy of,
88
Piscator, or the Fisher Caught,
a Comedy,
by John Hooker, 84
Pit
, 281
Pithias and Damon,
a Ballad,
intituled two lamentable Songes of, 289
Plato, 330
Plautus, 449, 473
Play of Love, by John Heywood, 88
Play of Playes, 288
Plays, 198, 338
Plays confuted in Five Actions, 288
Pleasant Poesie of Princelie Practise,
a Poem,
by Forrest, 312
Pleasure and Pain,
Metrical Sermon on,
by Crowley, 188
Plowman, Pierce. See Pierce Plowman
Plutarch, 393
Plutarch's Commentary,
translated into English Meeter
by Thomas Blundeville, 274
Poem of Poems, or Sion's Muse, by J. M. 318
Poemata Varia et Externa, by Drant, 429
Poetry, English, a Character of, in the Age of Elizabeth, 490, &c.
Poines, John, 34, 36
Poggio, 470
Pole, Cardinal, 9
Politian's Epigrams,
translated
by Kendall, 432
Polixinë and Astionax [i. e. Astyanax], 417
Polliceute, Kynge,
Ballet of,
423
Polybius, 278
Polyhistory of Solinus, 414
Polyolbion, by Drayton, 266
Pontanus, Isaacus, 349
Pope and the Turk,
a Metrical Prayer,
by Rob. Wisdome, 170
Pope, a, 11, 67, 357
Pope, Sir Thomas,
Life of,
34, 44, 46, 389
Pope and Popery,
Ballade made against,
by William Punt, 320
Popish Kingdom,
a Poem,
by Googe, 322
Portes, Philip de, 485
Pore Helpe,
a Poem,
197
Porter, Henry, 291. Endimion, 278
Positions, by Mulcaster, 346
Pos
ils of Chrytaeus, 413
Potter, George, 486
Powell, Thomas, 426
Poynet, Bishop of Winchester, 71, 188
Preservative, a Tract against the Pelagians, by Turner, 355
Preston, 289
Princelie Pleasures of Kenilworth-Castle, by Gascoigne, 293
Principles of Astronomical Prognostication, by Borde, 77
Prior, Matthew, 135, 137, 138, 140
Procris and Cephalus, 417
Procopius, 160
Progymnasmata aliquot Poemata, 392
Prolusions, by E. Capel, 136
Promos and Cassandra, 484
Promptuarie of Medicine, by Borde, 77
Prosopopeia Basilica,
a Latin Poem,
by Bolton. 279
Proverbes, &c. by John Heywood, 91, 343
Proverbs of Lopez de Mendoza, by Googe, 458
Proverbes,
Exposition on the,
by Th. Willson, 345
Prynne, Wil iam, 314, 464
Psalms of David,
translated
by Lord Surrey, 26, 166
by Wyat, 39, 166, 181
into French Rymes
by Clement Marot, 162, 163, 164, 165, 167
by R. Wisdome, 170
by King James I. 173
by William Hunnis, 180
by John Keeper, 186
by John Hall, 181
by Francis Seagar, 181
by Archbishop Parker, 181, 186
by Crowley, 187
by John Mardiley, 194
into a short Hebrew Metre
by Etheredge. 284
into English Meter,
by Sir William Forrest, 313
into English Prose,
by Christopher Carlile, 450
by Anonymus Authors, 182, 186
Psalms of David,
versifyed
by Thomas Norton, 169
fitted to Tunes
by William Slatyer, 144
versifyed
by Sternhold and Hopkins, 161, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 176, 185, 189, 191
Metrical Translation of,
by Lucas Shepherd, 316
Treatise in Meter
on the 119th, by Miles Hogard, 319
Exposition on the,
by Drant, 429
Exposition on the,
by Thomas Wilson, 345
Seven,
reduced into Meter
by Will. Hunnys, 370
Four First,
Englished in Latin Measures
by Rd. Stanyhurst, 399
the Ninety-fourth,
paraphrased
by Lord Morley, 86
Psalter, by A. Golding, 414
Psyche and Cupid,
Play of,
288
Pullayne, John, 316, 317
Punt, William,
Ballad
made against Pope and Popery,
by, 320
Puttenham, 44, 50, 96, 213, 277, 285, 291, 293, 335, 400, 415, 426
Pygmalion's Image, by Marston, 272, 417
Pygmalion,
Ballet of,
417
Pymlico, or run away Red Cap, 280
Pyramus and Thybe, 417
Pythias and Damon,
Play of,
284, 289
Q
Queens,
Masque of,
by Ben Johnson, 129
Quintil, 351
Quintilian,
translated,
336, 338
R
Rainolde, Richard, 345, 346
Raleigh, Sir Walter, 276, 278, 438
Randolph, Thomas, 418
Rape of Helen, by Marlowe, 433
Rape of Lucrece, 416
Raphael, 159
Rattlesden, or Bloomefield, William, 84, 85
Raydon; i. e. Roydon, Matthew, 281
Recreations on Adam's Banishment,
in Verse,
by W. Hunnis, 180
Redford, John, Organist of St. Paul's, a celebrated Musician, 298
Red-Cappe, Mother, her Last Will and Testament, 484
Refutation of Heywood's Apology for Actors, 289
Register of York Cathedral, 302
Resurrection of Lazarus,
an Interlude,
by John Bale, 78
Return from Parnassus,
Play of the,
280, 436
Reve of Totenham, 104
Reulidge, Richard, 289
Reynard the Fox, 73
Reynholds, Henry, 41, 435. Thomas, 345, 346
Rhetorick,
System of,
by Grimoald, 61
Rhetoric, English, 331, &c.
Rhodes, Hugh, the Boke of Nurtur for Men's Servants and Children, or of the Governance of Youth, by, 321
Richard Coeur de Lyon,
a Romance,
141, 347, 348
Richard III
History of,
by Sir Thomas More, 329
Richard III.
Play of,
339, 361
Richard III. Tragicall Report of,
a Ballad,
339
Rich, Barnaby, 482
Richmond, Henry Fitzroy, Duke of, e.
Poem on,
by Lord Surrey, 26
Rightwise, John, 435
Robert de Brunne, 127
Robin Hood, 290
Robinson, Richard, 391. Clement, 391
Rochford, Earl of, 41
Rock of Regard, by Whetstone, 404
Rogero and Rhodomont, Ariosto's
Story of, translated from the French
of Philip de Portes, by Gervis Markham, 485
Romanus Egidius, 313
Romeo and Juliet,
Play of,
287, 471
Romeus and Juletta, 471
Rosa Rosalynd and Rosemary,
Romance of,
by Newton, 392
Round Table,
Order of the,
476
Rowley, 290
Roydon, Matthew, 281
Rubric explained, 434
Rufull Lamentation,
a Poem,
by Sir Thomas More, 99
Rule of Life, or the Fifth Essence, by Bloomefield, 85
Rythmi Elegantissimi, by George Boleyn, 43
S
S. E. 484
S. I. 384
S. M. 285
S. R. i. e. Robert Southwell, 402, 442
S. W. 402
Sachetti, 470
Sackefull of Newes, 423
Sackville, Thomas, Lord Buckhurst, 169, 210, 212, 221, 233, 264, 273, 277, 281, 285, 293, 355, 356, 362, 397
Sacra Dramata, 458
Sadler, John, 429
Saint Catherine,
Play of,
323
Saint George,
Play of,
327
Saint Nicholas Day, 322, 325
Saint Paul's Epistles,
versified
by John Hall, 181
Saint Peter's Complaint, by Southwell, 277, 318
Salmacis and Hermaphroditus,
translated
by Peend, 416; by Beaumont, 417
Salomon, Kynge,
a Ballad,
306
Sandys, Lord, 155
Sappho and Phao,
Play of,
by Lilly, 418, 420
Saracens,
Notable History of the,
by Thomas Newton, 392
Scaliger, 444
School of Vertue and Book of Good Nurture,
a Rhyming Manual,
by Crowley, 188
Schoole of Abuse, by Gosson, 288
Schoolmaster, by Ascham, 331
Scogan, 76
Scoggin's Jests, 76, 475
Scole House of Women, 142, 320, 423
Scot, Dr. Cuthbert,
Latin Elegy on,
by Drant, 429
Scots, Queen of, Mary, 56
Scourge of Villanie, by Marston, 272
Scourging of Tiplers, by Re
lidge, 289
Scylla and Glaucus, 418
Seagar, or Seagers, Francis, 181, 215, 267, 272
Secrete of Secretes of Aristotle,
translated
by Copland, 313
Seige of Tournay, by Minot, 148
Seneca, 273, 290, 382, 386, 415, 417
Sergeant and Freere,
Mery Jeste of,
by Sir Thomas More, 97, 98, 136
Seton, John, 429
Settle, Dennis,
Voyage of,
404
Seven Sobs of a Sorrowful Soule for Sin, by William Hunnis, 180
Seven Steppes to Heaven, 370
Seven Wise Men of Gotham, 475
Sexton, Maister, the real Name of Patch, Cardinal Wolsey's Fool, 89
Shadowe of Truth in Epigrams and Satires, 488
Shakespeare, William, 45, 57, 67, 102, 108, 153, 265, 266, 267, 281, 287, 290, 293, 294, 295, 339, 361, 366, 393, 399, 416, 435, 447, 465, 471, 475, 478, 483, 494, 496, 499
Sheffield, Edmund, Lord, 58
Shelton, 26
Shepherd, Lucas, 316
Sheppard, 313
Shepreve, John, 284
Sherlock, Roger, 429
Sherry, Richard, English Rhetoric, by, 345
Shoemaker's Holyday, or the Gentle Craft,
Play of,
430
Shore, Jane, 215, 270, 280
Short Resytal of certyne Holie Doctors,
collected in Myter,
by John Mardiley, 194
Sibelet, Thomas, 350, 351
Sidney. See Sydney.
Similies and Proverbes, by Baldwyn, 212
Similis, a Treasorie and Storehouse of, 486
Simon the Leper,
an Interlude,
by John Bale, 78
Simonides,
the straunge and wonderfull Adventures of,
by Barnaby Rich, 48
Sion's Muse, or the Poem of Poems, 318, 319
Sir Bevis of Southampton,
Romance of,
141, 142
Sir Hugh of Bourdeux,
Romance of, translated from the French
by Lord Berners, 58
Sir Peny,
Romance of,
93, 94, 106
Sir Thopas,
Poem,
by Chaucer, 35
Sir Tristram and Bel Isoulde,
Romance of,
420
Siworix and Camma, 466
Six Yeomen of the West, 430
Skelton, John, 44, 74, 83, 200, 215, 270, 276
Skotte, Cuthbert, 429
Slatyer, William, certaine Psalms of David,
fitted to Tunes,
by, 144
Smith, or Smyth, Sir Thomas, 450. Robert, 481. William, 402. Richard, 450
Smithus, by Gabriel Harvey, 334
Solinus, 414. Polyhistory of,
translated
by Golding, 414
Solomon and Queen of Sheba,
a Ballad,
307
Solomon, Canticles or Songs of,
versified
by W. Baldwyn, 181, 212
Solomon's Proverbes,
translated into English Metre
by John Hall, 181
Solomon's Song, 317, 318, 451
Somerset, Edw. Duke of, Expedition into Scotlande, by Wm. Patten, 213
Somerset, Lord Protector, 198
Sommers, William, 336, 337
Somnium Scipionis, by Tully, 236
Song of Songs,
translated into English Meater,
317
Sonnets by B. Googe, 450
Sonnets by Henry Lock, 445
Sonnets by Sackville, 273
Sonnets by Turberville, &c. 286, 296, 355
Sonnets by Watson, 433
Southwell, Robert, 277, 318. Sir Richard, 299
Spanish Library, 476
Speculum Britanniae, by Norden, 76, 83
Speed, 279
Spence, 366
Spencer, Edmund, 14, 51, 87, 233, 234, 239, 262, 276, 280, 281, 400, 406, 409, 421, 422, 436, 445, 447, 480, 498, 499
Spicelegium of the Greek Tongue, by Edward Grant, 402
Spider and the Flie,
a Poem,
by J. Heywood, 92, 93, 94, 95, 96
Spiritual Agriculture, by Barnaby Googe, 458
Spondanus, 444
Stage of Popish Toyes,
written by
T. N. 370
Stafford, Lord Henry, 216
Stanbridge's Latin Prosody, 393
Stanyhurst, Robert, 399, 400, 401, James, 399
Stapylton, Richard, 402, 442
Starkey, Oliver, 320
Statius, 253
Steevens, Henry,
Epigrams of, translated
by Kendall, 432
Sternhold, Thomas, 39, 161, 166, 167, 171, 172, 173, 174, 175, 178, 181, 185, 189, 191, 314, 319, 441, 455
Stoke Clare, College of, 183
Stonehenge, 278
Storehouse of Similies, 486
Storer, Thomas, 281
Stories of Men's Lives, 203
Stowe, 291, 425
Strype, John, 186, 191, 202, 204, 301, 326, 355
Stubb's Anatomie of Abuses, 289
Studley, John, 290, 383, 384, 417
Suffolk, Henry, Duke of, 342
Sundry Christian Passions in 200 Sonnets, by Lock, 445
Supposes,
a Comedy,
by G. Gascoigne, 474
Surfeit to A, B, C, by Dr. Philip King, 279
Surrey, Lord, 2 to 9, 27, 57, 65, 70, 85, 166, 182, 273, 277, 281, 382, 415, 426
Susannah,
Book of, versified
by Pullaine, 316
Susanna,
Play of,
328.
Balad of,
287.
Swi
t, Dean, 13
Sydney, Sir P. 11, 169, 273, 277, 281, 363, 386, 414, 419, 421, 480, 496
Sylva, by Drant, 429
Sylvan, or Sylvain, Alexander, 482, 483
Sylvester, John, 281
Sylvius, Aeneas, 416
Synesius, Greek Panegyric on Baldness,
translated
by Fleming, 404
Syrinx, or a Seavenfold Historie, by Warner, 473
T
T. C. 194
T. R. i. e. Robert To
ts, 481
Table of Aristotle's Ten Categories, by Googe, 458
Tale of Two Swannes,
a Poem in Blank Verse,
by Wm. Vall
ns, 65
Tales in Prose, set forth by Edwards, 293
Tales,
Utility of,
340
Tallis, a Musician, 172, 194
Tamberlain the Great,
Play of,
392
Taming of the Shrew,
a Play,
by Shakespeare, 294
Tancred and Gismund, 376, 470
Tanner, Bishop, 293, 425, 430, 450, 473
Tarlton, Richard, 291, 345, 481
Tasso, Torquato, 485, 499
Taverner, John, 313
Teares of the Muses, by Spenser, 409
Te Deum,
versified
by Whyttingham, 168; by
, 182; by Forrest, 313
Tempest,
Play of the,
129, 435, 478
Ten Commandments,
versified
by W. Whittingham, 168
Terannye of Judge Apius,
a Ballad,
416
Terence,
translated,
449
Terence, And
ia of,
Commentary on,
by N. Grimoald, 60
Terge, Golden, by Sir D. Lyndsay, 50
Tesoretto,
a Poem,
by Brunetto Lattini, 237, 254
Textor's Epigrams,
translated
by Kewdall, 432
Testament of the Twelve Patriarchs, by Pullaine, 316
Testwood, a Singer, 46
Theatre of God's Judgements, 289, 437
Theatrum Poetarum, by Phillips, 11, 392
Thebais, by Newton, 391
Theodore and Honoria, 468
Thersytes, his Humours and Conceits,
an Interlude,
445
Theseid and Troilus, by Boccace, 464
Theseus and Ariadne,
excellent Historie of,
420
Tholouse, the Erle of,
Lay of the,
122
Thomas, William, Italian Grammar, by, 464
Three Bookes of Moral Philosophy, by W. Baldwyn, 212
Three worthy Squires of Darius King of Persia, 328
Three Laws,
a Comedy,
by John Bale, 198, 200
Thyestes of Seneca,
translated,
273
Tiberius,
Life of the Emperor,
by Bolton, 278
Tibullus, 408
Timon of Athens,
Play of,
153
Terante the White,
Romance of,
476
Titerus and Galathea,
Comoedie of,
406
Titian, 159
Titus Andronicus,
Tragedy of,
485
Titus and Gesippus, 468
Tom of all Trades, by Thomas Powell, 426
Tom Thumb,
Origin of,
71
Tottell, Richard, 28, 47, 60, 69
Touchstone of Wittes, by Edward Hake, 275
Touchstone for this Time present, by Edward Hake, 426
Tournament of Tottenham, 102, 103, 104, 105, 106
Toxophilus, by Ascham, 300, 329, 331
Tragical Discourses, by Fenton, 478
Tragical Tales, by Turberville, 475
Tragical Treatises, by R. Tarleton, 481
Treasorie of Similes, 486
Trionli d'Amour of Petrarch, 463
Trissino, 25
Tristram, Sir,
Romance of,
242
Tristram, Sir, and Bel Isoulde, 420
Tritameron of Love, 483
Triumphs of reunited Britannia, 290
Triumphs of Old Drapery, 290
Troa
of Seneca,
translated
by Jasper Heywood, 290
Troilus,
History of, a Ballet,
417
Troilus and Cressida, by Chaucer, 12, 57
Troilus and Cressida,
Play of,
by Shakespeare, 57, 108
Trojan War, by Iscanus, 61
Trovar, Libro de la Arte de, o Gaya Sciencia, por Enrique de Villena, 349
Troya, Belenguer de, 349
Tully's Dream of Scipio,
translated
by Parker, Lord Morley, 86. See Cicero
Tully's Offices,
translated
by N. Grimoald, 60
Tully's Tusculane Questions,
translated
by I. Dolman, 215
Tumblers, 303
Turberville, George, 11, 57, 281, 286, 420, 421, 457, 472, 475, 476, 479, 481, 485.
Thomas
lege
George,
420
Turner, Dr. William, a Poem against the Papists, by, 188
Tusser, Thomas, 298, 299, 300, 301, 302, 303, 304, 305, 306, 307, 308, 309, 310
Twel
th Night,
Comedy of,
287
Twelve Patriarch
, Testament of,
versified
by Pullai
e, 316
Two Gentlemen of Verona,
Play of the,
345
Two Synnes of King Davide,
enterlude of the,
328
Twyne, Thomas, 287, 396. John, 396. Lawrence, 396
Tye, Dr. Christopher, 170, 190, 19
, 468
Tye the Mare Tomboye,
a Ballad,
418
Tyndale's Bible, 203
V
Vaghane or Vaughan, Robert, 106, 107
Valerius Flaccus, 409
Valla Laurentio, 61
Vallans, William, 65, 66, 67
Van Wilder, Philip, 301
Vandenbright, Alexander, 483
Vaulx or Vaux, Lord, 41, 43, 45, 57, 215
Udall, Nicholas, 259, 298
Vegetius's Tactics, English Version of, by Sadler, 429
Verstegan's Restitution of Decayed Intelligence, 399
Vindiciae Britanicae, by Bolton, 279
Vineyard of Virtue, by Robinson, 391
Violenta and Didaco, 422
Virgil, 21 to 25, 209, 238, 278, 395, 396, 402, 403, 407, 415
Eneid, Second and Fourth Books of,
translated
by Lord Surrey, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 278
Eneid, Second Part of,
translated
by Sir Thomas Wroth, 404
Eneid,
translated
by Phair, 395, 396 to 415
Eneid,
translated
by Stanyhurst, 399, 400
Bucolics,
translated
by Abraham Fleming, 25, 402
Virgil's Bucolics, and Fourth Georgic,
translated
by Mr. Brinsly, 404
Georgics,
translated
by Abraham Fleming, 25, 402, 403
Georgics,
translated
by William Webbe, 405
Georgics,
paraphrased
by Nicholas Grimoald, 60
Alexis,
translated
by Abraham Fraunce, 405
Culex,
paraphrase
on, by Edmund Spenser, 406
Ceiris, or the Fable of Nisus and Scylla, a Poem, attributed to, 406, 407, 408
Virgil, Polydore, 307
Virginia and Appius,
a poem,
415
Virtue, Court of, 424
Virtues and Vices, Battle between, by A. Fleming, 404
Vive
Ludovicus, 294
Underdown, Thomas, 419, 420
Ungod
inesse of the Hethnicke Goddes, a Poem, by J. D. 314
Union of the two Noble and Illustrious Families of York and Lancaster, by Hall, 214
Untrussing of the Humorous Poet, Play of, by Dekker, 488
Voice of the last Trumpet blown by the Seventh Angel, by Crowley, 187
Voltaire, 177, 252, 253
Voyage Liturgique, by Sieur Le Brun, 152
Urania, a
Romance,
by Lady Mary Wroth, 444
Use of Adagues, by W. Baldwyn, 212
W
W. R. i. e. Robert Wilmot, 376, 466, 470, 482
W. W. See William Warner
Waller, Ed. 11, 16, 443
Walpole, Horace, 4
Walton, Isaac, Compleat Angler, by, 438
Warner, William, 272, 277, 281, 449, 473
Watkin's Ale,
a Ballad,
292
Watson, Thomas, 280, 281, 315, 400, 433
Wayer, 423
Waylings of the Prophet Hieremiah
done
into English Verse by T. Drant, 424
Weathers,
Enterlude of all maner of,
88
Webbe, William, 44, 275, 276, 291, 376, 399, 400, 404, 414, 479
Weede
, by George Gascoigne, 474
Weever, John, 280, 281. William, 281
Weever's Funeral Monuments, 81
Welspring of Wittie Conceipts,
translated
out of the Italian by W. Phist, 308
Wentworth, Lady, Poem on the Death of, 46
Wever, R. 200
Whetstone, George, 279, 289, 404, 483, 484
Whipping of Runawaies, by Pe
owe, 434
Whitgift, John, 488
Whyttingham, William, 167, 168 172
Whore of Babylon, a
ballad
on the Fall of the, 418
Whore of Babylon,
Comedy of the,
195
Whyte, Nycholas, 409
Wiat. See Wyat
Wickliffe, 354
Wil of Wit, by Nicholas Breton, 402
Wilford, Sir James,
Poem on the Death of,
46, 69
Williams, R. 485. Henry,
Poem on the Death of,
46. Sir John, 46
Willow Garland,
a Song,
287
Wilmot, Robert, 376, 466, 470, 482
Wilson, Thomas, 91, 291, 298, 331, 334, 335, 336, 337, 338, 339, 340, 341, 342, 343, 344, 345, 353
Wilton's Epitaphia, 432
Windsor Castle, 12, 13
Winsore, Miles, an Actor, 287
Wisdome, Robert, 170
Wit's Commonwealth, 290
Wit's Treasury, by Meres, 213, 290, 345, 399, 433
Wolsey, Cardinal, 146, 155, 158, 435
Wood, Anthony, 28, 45, 72, 96, 167, 283, 293, 311, 425
Woorkes of a Yong Witte, &c. by N. B. or Nicholas Breton, 485
Wroth, Lady Mary, 444. Sir Thomas, 404
Wyat, Sir Thomas, 10 to 18, 28, 38, 46, 57, 70, 166, 277, 281, 415
Wyvyng and Thryvynge of Tushers, with two Lessons for Olde and Yonge,
a Dialogue,
304
Y
Ywain and Gawain,
Romance of,
108, 109, 110, 111, 112, 113, 114, 115, 116, 117, 118, 119, 120, 121, 122, 123, 124, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134
Yelverton, Christopher, 274
Young or Yong Bartholemew, 466
Youthe, Charite and Humylite, 475
Z
Zodiacus Vitae of Palingenius, 405, 449, 451, 466
Zodiacke of Life,
translated
by B. Googe, 405, 449, 466
Zorvas, an Egyptian Astronomer,
Poem on the Death of,
by Nicholas Grimoald, 63, 64, 65
INDEX TO THE
GESTA ROMANORUM,
PREFIXED TO THE THIRD VOLUME OF WARTON'S History of English Poetry.
AELIAN, 58
Aesopicae Anonymi Fabulae, 73
Agrippa Cornelius, 21
Ahasuerus and Ester,
Romance of,
74
Alanus de Lynne, 87
Albione King of the Lombards,
History of,
24.
Tragedy
by Davenant, 25
Alexander,
Romance of,
33, 39, 42, 43, 59
Allexius, or Alexis, 11, 12, 13
Alphonsus Peter, 6, 42, 66, 68, 69, 73, 74, 82, 94
Amadis de Gaule,
Romance of,
16, 96
Amyot 20
Amys and Amelion, 54
Androclus,
Story of,
40
Andronicus Titus, 25
Antiche Cento Novelle, 25, 49, 54, 58, 66, 84
Antiochus,
Story of,
4
Antoine Marc La Vie et Fais de, et de sa mie Cleopatra, 20
Appollonius of Tyre,
Romance of,
4, 62, 63
Appion, 40, 41
Aquinas, Thomas, 74,
Argus and Mercury,
Story of,
51
Ariosto, 16, 96
Artstotle's Secretum Secretorum, 10, 19
Aristotelem de Regina quae equitavit, 93
Arthur King,
Romance of,
80, 88
Asmodeus King, 26
Askew Dr. 69
Atis and Porphilion,
Romance of,
35
Atalanta,
Tale of,
27
Aunfour le Romaunz de pere coment il aprist et chastia son fils belement, 6
Austin Saint, his City of God, 58, 74
B
Barlaam and Josaphat,
Romance of,
by Joannes Damascenus, 49, 51, 61, 68
Belleforest, 3, 25
Berchorius Petrus, or Pierre Bercheur, Author of the Gesta Romanorum, 86, 87, 88, 89, 90, 91, 92, 93
Bernard Saint,
Legend of,
68
Bible allegorised, 87
Bibliae Moralizationes, 87
Boccace, 2, 16, 25, 49, 50, 68, 81, 84, 92, 93, 94
Boethius, 5
Breviari d'Amor, by Eymegau de Bezers, 81
Browne William, 56, 57
C
Caesar Julius,
Romance of,
20, 32
Cacan or Cacanus, 23
Calilah u Dumnah, 6, 55, 74
Cambucas, by Vincent Beauvais, 39
Canterbury Tales, 65
Caxton, 2, 13, 14, 17, 22, 24, 50, 52, 62, 68, 69, 70
Celestinus, 67
Cendrata Ludovicus, 66
Cent's Novelle Antiche, 25, 49, 54, 58, 66, 84
Cervantes, 72,
Cesarius, 82
Chapman George, 3
Charlemagne, 23
Chaucer, 3, 6, 15, 38, 39, 47, 59, 65, 66, 69, 70, 74, 81, 83, 84, 93
Chorle and the Bird, by Lidgate, 6
Christine of Pisa, 52
Chronica Novella, by Herman Korner, 7, 88
Chronicle of St. Albans, 6
Chronicon of St. Denis, 38
City of God, by S. Austin, 58, 62, 74
City of Ladies,
Romance of the,
58
Clericalis Disciplina, by Peter Alphonsus, 5, 6, 42, 68, 73, 82
Conan and Rosmilla, 23
Contemptu Mundi, by Pope Innocent the Third, 89
Copland Robert, 63
Cosmographie, by Heylin, 25, 90
Court of Sapience,
translated
by Caxton, 2, 70
D
Daemonologie, by James First, 37
Damascenus Joannes, his
Romance of
Barlaam and Josaphat, 49, 61, 68
Darius,
Romance of,
56, 57, 78
Davenant Sir William, 25
Davie Adam, 33, 39, 43
Decameron of Boccaccio, 2,
2
Despauterius, 90
Diaconus Paulus, 23
Dialogues Divine, by Dr. Henry More, 31
Diasconios Syr Libeaux,
Romance of,
47
Dictionarium Morale, by Berchorius, 87
Dionysius, 22
Discipulus, or Herolt John, 93, 94
Ditmar, 47
Doctrinale Metricum, by Berchorius, 87
Doni, 55
Dryden John, 25
Dymock Roger, 65
E
Edituus Hermanus, 90
Edric, 6
Edwards Richard, 69
Elizabeth Queen, 90
Emare,
Lay of,
59, 75, 78
Engelhus Conrade, 90
Esop,
Fables of,
1, 17, 73, 74
Ester and Ahasuerus,
a Romance,
74
Eusebius,
Chronica of,
58, 88
Eymegau de Bezers, a Bard of Languedoc, 81
F
Fabricius, 66
Fais de Romains, 6
Faguel Lady of,
Romance of the,
25
Farmer Dr. 4
Fayttes of Armes and of Chivalrye, by Christine of Pisa.
Translated
by Caxton, 52
Florence,
History of,
by Machiavel, 25
Florentino Giovanni, 83
Florio and Biancoflore,
Adventures of,
by Boccaccio, 81
Florus, 6, 89
Frankelein's Tale, by Chaucer, 15
Froissart, 74, 76, 77
G
Ganterus, 33
Garin,
French Romance of,
38
Gaston, Earl of Foiz, 75
Gerbert Pope, or Sylvester Second, 45, 46
Gerelaus, 83
Gervase of Tilbury, 64, 67, 88, 90
Gesta Grayorum, 3
Gesta Longobardorum, 18, 23
Gesta Romanorum,
Account of the Editions of,
4, 5, 6, 7, 82, 83
Giles Goosecap,
Comedy of,
3
Gilbert King, 18
Giron the Courteous,
Romance of,
16
Glassius Salomon, 86, 87
Godfrey of Viterbo, 90
Golden Legende, 50
Gorgonius, 52
Gower, 3, 7, 9, 22, 26, 37, 49, 55, 61, 65, 70, 83, 84
Gregory of Tours, 76
Guiccardini, 22
Guido and Tirius, 71
Guillaume, Prior of Chaulis, 69
Guy Earl of Warwick,
Romance of,
71
H
Herbert Sir Philip, his Conceptions to his Son, 31
Hermegild, 84
Heroldus Joannes Basilius, 90
Herolt John, 93, 94
Histories Tragiques, by Belleforest, 3, 25
Howel's Letter, 30
I
Jacobus de Vitriaco
Jacobus de Voragine, 13, 18
James, King, the First, 37
Jerusalem, Sege of,
a Romance,
43
Innocent, Pope 3rd, his Miserie of Human Nature, 89
Johnson, Dr. 50
Josephus, 66
Julian, 14
Jovinian, l'Empereur, L'Orgueil et Presomption de, an old French Moralite, 27
Iris and Osiris, how the Egyptians deified, 19
Isodore, 21
Julius Caesar,
Romance of,
20, 32
Ivo, 90
Justin, 68, 89
K
Kalendrier des Bergers, 67
Knyght of the Swanne,
Romance of the, translated
by Copland, 63
Korner Herman, 7
L
Lady of Faguel,
Romance of the,
25
Lancelot du Lake,
Romance of,
16
Lanfrane, 90
Langius Paulus, 90, 91
Lapus de Castellione, 7
Launfal Syr,
Romance of,
35, 38, 43, 54, 56, 63
Legenda Aurea,
translated
by Caxton, 13, 14, 17, 51, 68
Livy, 6, 7, 68, 89, 91
Lucretia,
Story of,
58
Luther, Martin, 17
Lycophron, 95
Lydgate, 3, 6, 26, 69, 70
M
Machiavel's History of Florence, 25
Macrobius, 5, 22
Malmsbury William of, 47
Man of Law's Tale, by Chaucer, 84
Mauffer Peter, 66
Maundeville Sir John, Travels, 11
Maximus Valerius, 21
May-day,
a Comedy,
by George Chapman, 3
Mazentius, 32
Medro King, 58
Merchant of Venice,
Play of the,
49, 82
Metrical Lives of the Saints, 11, 18, 50, 68
Milton, 42, 79
Mirabilia Romae, 26
Mirror of History, by Vincent Beauvais, 1
Mirrour for Magistrates, 4
Miseries of Human Nature, or de Miseria Humanae conditionis, by Innocent the Third, 89
Montaigne, 77
Montfaucon, 20, 26
Moralizationes Bibliae, 87
More Dr. Henry, 31
Mozarabes, or Missal of St. Isodore, 52
Muratori, 21
Mysteries, 17, 37
N
Nangis Guillaume, 88
Nevelet, 73
North Sir Thomas, 20
Nonnes Preestes
Prologue,
by Chaucer, 39
O
Occleve, 56, 83, 84, 94
Orosius, 89
Otia Imperialia, by Gervase of Tilbury, 67
Ovid, 65, 88, 92, 95.
Commentary on,
by Berchorius, 92
P
Pallas, Discovery of the gigantic Body of, 88
Paris Matthew, 55
Parnell, 30, 94
Paulus Diaconus, 23
Pecorone of Ser Florentino Giovanni, 83
Pelagyen, the
Lyf of,
17
Pelerin de l'Ame, by Guillaume, Prior of Chaulis, 69
Pepin, 53, 54
Perce Forest,
Romance of,
16
Periander of Corinth, 62
Pfinzing Melchior,
Romance of
Teurdank, 23
Phebus de deduiz de la Chasse des Bestes Sauvages et des Oyseaux de proye, 21
Philip of Macedon,
a Romance,
57
Philologiae Sacrae, by Glassius, 86
Piso, 59
Placidus or Placidas,
the Life of,
51
Plistonices or Appion, 40
Pliny, 5, 20, 21, 32
Polonus Martinus, 90
Pompey of a Daughter of King, whose Chamber was guarded by five armed Knights and a Dog, 8
Pope Alexander, 31
Porphilion and Ati
,
Romance of,
35
Possevin, 16
Primalcon,
Romance of,
16
Prodigal Son, 9
Pylgrimage of the Sowle, by Caxton, 69
Pilgrimage of the World, 70,
R
Record of Ancient Hystories, 83
Reductorium Morale, by Berchorius, 87
Repertorium Morale, by Berchorius, 87
Rinucinus Alamanus, 64, 74
Robert of Gloucester, 79
Robert of St. Victor, 90
Robert King of Sicily,
Poem of,
27
Romaunt of the Ro
e 38, 81, 96
Rome, the Stacions of,
a Romance,
26
Romeo and Juliet,
Play of,
76
Romuleon, or des Fais de Romains, 6, 7, 89
Romulus, 73
Rosmilla and Conan, 23
Rucellai Giovanni, 25
Rudimentum Novitiorum, 74
Rymer, 77
S
Saint Alban's Chronicle, 6
Saint Austin, 58, 74
Saints,
Metrical Lives of the,
11, 18, 50, 68
Sapience, laberous and marveylous Worke of, 70. Court of, 2, 70
Salmeron, 87
Scotus Marianus, his Epitaphia joco seria, 90
Scientiarum de Vanitate, 21
Secretum Secretorum of Aristotle, 8, 10, 19
Sege of Jerusalem,
Romance of the,
44
Seneca, 5, 59
Sermones de Sanctis, 94
Sermones Quadragesimales, 94
Seth Simeon, 55, 59
Shakespeare, 20, 25, 49, 50, 76, 82, 83
Shepherd's Pipe, by W. Browne, 56, 57
Speculum Historiale, by Vincent Beauvais, 11, 49, 59, 61
Spenser, Edmund, 44, 96
Solinus, 90
Sompnour's Tale, by Chaucer, 59
Stacions of Rome,
Romance of,
26
Swanne, Knyght of the,
a Romance,
63
Sweertius, 91
Swift Dean, 32
Sylvester the Second, 45
Syr Launfal,
Romance of,
35, 38, 43, 54, 56, 63
Syr Libeaux Diasconio
Romance of,
47
Syr Tryamore,
Romance of,
84
T
Tale of two Marchants of Egypt and Bagdad, by Lidgate, 69
Tale of a Tub, by Swift, 32
Tankarville, le Comte de, 21
Tanner Bishop, 4
Theagenes and Chariclea of Heliodorus,
translated into French
by Amyot, 20
Theocritus, 37
Thomas of Elmhan, 74
Tito and Gesippo, 68, 69, 94
Titus Andronicus, by Shakespeare, 25
Tristan,
Romance of,
16
Trogus Pompeius, 68, 69
Trophologia, 90
Troy Book, 65
Tryamore Sir,
Romance of,
84
Tuerdank,
a Romance in German Rhymes,
23
Tumbeley Robert, 65
Turpin, 54, 65
Tyrwhitt, 66, 67, 92
V
Valerius Maximus, 5
Vanitate Scientiarum, 21
Vere Guido, Bishop of Trevoly, 10
Vespasian, 10
Vincent of Beauvais, 1, 9, 15, 25, 39, 49, 54, 59, 61, 74, 86
Virgil the Nicromancer,
History of,
25 83
Virgin Mary,
Li
of,
by Lidgate, 69, 70. Miracles of, 94
Voragine Jacobus de, 18
Vossius, 64
W
Waley's Thomas, 65. John, 95
Westfalia John de, 4
William of Malmsbury, 45, 88
Witte H. his Diarum Biographicum, 86
X
Ximenes Cardinal, 53
Yvan of Leschell, 75
Z
Zeiner Joannes de Reutlingen, his Moralizationes Bibliae, 87
