THE Double-Dealer. COMEDY. As it is Acted at the
THEATRE ROYAL.
By Their MAJESTIES Servants.
Written by Mr.
CONGREVE.
Interdum tamen, & vocem Comedia tollit.
Ar. Po.
Huic equidem Consilio palmam do: hic me magnifice effero, qui vim tantam in me & potestatem habeam tantae astutiae, vera dicendo ut eos ambos fallam.
Syr. in Terent.
The SECOND EDITION.
LONDON,
Printed for
Jacob Tonson,
Grays-Inn
Lane. 1706.
To the Right Honourable
CHARLES MONTAGƲ E,
One of the Lords of the
TREASURY.
SIR,
I Heartily wish this Play
as perfect as I intended it, that it might be more worthy your Acceptance; and that my Dedication of it to you, might be more becoming that Honour and Esteem which I, with every Body, who are so fortunate as to know you, have for you. It had your Countenance when yet unknown; and now it is made publick, it wants your Protection.
I would not have any Body imagine, that I think
without
Faults, for I am Conscious of several. I confess I design'd (whatever Vanity or Ambition occasion'd that Design) to have written a true and regular Comedy, but I found it an Undertaking which put me in mind of—
Sudet multum, frustraque laboret ausus idem.
And now to make Amends for the Vanity of such a Design, I do confess both the Attempt, and the imperfect Performance. Yet I must take the Boldness to say, I have not miscarried in the whole; for the Mechanical part of it is perfect. That I may say with as little Vanity, as a Builder may say he has built a House according to the Model laid down before him; or a Gardiner that he has set his Flowers in a Knot of such or such a Figure. I design'd the Moral first, and to that Moral I invented the Fable, and do not know that I have borrow'd one Hint of it any where. I made the Plot as strong as I could, because it was single, and I made it single, because I would avoid Confusion, and was resolved to preserve the three Unities of the Drama, which I have visibly done to the utmost Severity. This is what I ought not to observe upon my self; but the Ignorance and Malice of the greater Part of the Audience is such, that they would make a Man turn Herald to his own Play, and Blazon every Character. However, Sir, this Discourse is very impertinent to you, whose Judgement much better can discern the Faults, than I can excuse them; and whose good Nature, like that of a Lover, will find out those hidden Beauties (if there are any such) which it wou'd be great Immodesty for me to discover. I think I don't speak improperly when I call you a
Lover
of Poetry; for it is very well known she has been a very kind Mistress to you; she has not deny'd you the last Favour; you have enjoy'd her, and she has been fruitful in a most Beautiful Issue—If I break off abruptly here, I hope every Body will understand that it is to avoid a Commendation, which, as it is your Due, would be most easie for me to pay, and too troublesome for you to receive.
I have, since the Acting of this Play, harken'd after the Objections which have been made to it; for I was Conscious where a true Critick might have put me upon my Defence. I was prepared for their Attack; and am pretty confident I could have vindicated some Parts, and excused others; and where there were any plain Miscarriages, I would most ingenuously have confess'd 'em. But I have not heard any thing said sufficient to provoke an Answer. That which looks most like an Objection, does not relate in particular to this Play, but to all or most that ever have been written; and that is Soliloquy. Therefore I will answer it, not only for my own sake, but to save others the Trouble, to whom it may hereafter be Objected.
I grant, that for a Man to Talk to himself, appears absurd and unnatural; and indeed it is so in most Cases; but the Circumstances which may attend the Occasion, make great Alteration. It oftentimes happens to a Man, to have Designs which require him to himself, and in their Nature cannot admit of a Confident. Such, for certain, is all Villany; and other less mischievous Intentions may be very improper to be Communicated to a second Person. In such a Case therefore the Audience must observe, whether the Person upon the Stage takes any notice of them at all, or no. For if he supposes any one to be by, when he talks to himself, it is monstrous and ridiculous to the last degree. Nay, not only in this case, but in any Part of a Play, if there is expressed any knowledge of an Audience, it is insufferable. But otherwise, when a Man in Soliloquy reasons with himself, and
Pro
's and
Con
's, and weighs all his Designs: We ought not to imagine that this Man either talks to us, or to himself; he is only thinking, and thinking such Matter as were inexcusable Folly in him to speak. But because we are conceal'd Spectators of the Plot in agitation, and the Poet finds it necessary to let us know the whole Mystery of his Contrivance, he is willing to inform us of this Person's Thoughts; and to that end is forc'd to make use of the expedient of Speech, no other better way being yet invented for the Communication of Thought.
Another very wrong Objection has been made by some who have not taken Leisure to distinguish the Characters. The Hero of the Play, as they are pleas'd to call him, (meaning
Mellefont
) is a Gull, and made a Fool, and cheated. Is every Man a Gull and a Fool that is deceiv'd? At that rate I'm afraid the two Classes of Men, will be reduc'd to one, and the Knaves themselves be at a loss to justifie their Title: But if an Open-hearted honest Man, who has an entire Confidence in one whom he takes to be his Friend, and whom he has oblig'd to be so; and who (to confirm him in his Opinion) in all Appearance, and upon several Trials has been so: If this Man be deceiv'd by the Treachery of the other; must he of necessity commence Fool immediately, only because the other has prov'd a Villam? Ay, but there was Caution given to
Mellefont
in the First Act by his Friend
Careless.
Of what Nature was that Caution? Only to give the Audience some Light into the Character of
Maskwell,
before his Appearance; and not to convince
Mellefont
of his Treachery; for that was more than
Careless
was then able to do: He never knew
Maskwell
guilty of any Villany; he was only a sort of Man which he did not like. As for his suspecting his Familiarity with my Lady
Touchwood:
Let 'em examine the Answer that
Mellefont
makes him, and compare it with the Conduct of
Maskwell
's Character through the Play.
I would beg'em again to look into the Character of
Maskwell
before they accuse
Mellefont
of Weakness for being deceiv'd by him. For upon summing up the Enquiry into this Objection, it may be found they have mistaken Cunning in one Character, for Folly in another.
But there is one thing, at which I am more concerned than all the false Criticisms that are made upon me; and that is, some of the Ladies are offended. I am heartily sorry for it, for I declare I would rather disoblige all the Criticks in the World than one of the Fair Sex. They are concerned that I have represented some Women Vicious and Affected: How can I help it? It is the Business of a Comick Poet to paint the Vices and Follies of Human-kind; and there are but two Sexes, Male, and Female,
Men,
and
Women,
which have a Title to Humanity: And if I leave one half of them out, the Work will be imperfect. I should be very glad of an opportunity to make my Compliment to those Ladies who are offended: But they can no more expect it in a Comedy, than to be Tickled by a Surgeon, when he's letting 'em Blood. They who are Virtuous or Discreet, can hardly be offended, for such Characters as these distinguish
them,
and make their Beauties more shining and observ'd: And they who are of the other kind, may nevertheless pass for such, by seeming not to be displeas'd, or touch'd with the Satire of this
Comedy.
Thus have they also wrongfully accus'd me of doing them a Prejudice, when I have in reality done them a Service.
I have heard there are some who intend to accuse this Play of Smuttiness and Bawdy: But I can hardly believe it, because I took a particular Care to avoid it, and if they find any in it, it is of their own making, for I did not design it to be so understood. But to avoid my saying any Thing upon a Subject, which has been so admirably handled before, and for their better Instruction, I earnestly recommend to their Perusal, the Epistle Dedicatory before the
Plain-Dealer.
You will pardon me, Sir, for the Freedom I take of making Answers to other People, in an Epistle which ought wholly to be sacred to you: But since I intend the Play to be so too, I hope I may take the more Liberty of Justifying it, where it is in the Right.
I must now, Sir, declare to the World, how kind you have been to my Endeavours; for in regard of what was well meant, you have excus'd what was ill perform'd. I beg you would continue the same Method in your Acceptance of this Dedication. I know no other way of making a Return to that Humanity you shew'd, in protecting an Infant, but by Enrolling it in your Service, now that it is of Age and come into the World. Therefore be pleas'd to accept of this as an Acknowledgement of the Favour you have shewn me, and an Earnest of the real Service and Gratitude of,
SIR,
Your Most Obliged, Humble Servant,
William Congreve.
To my Dear Friend Mr,
CONGREVE,
On His COMEDY, call'd, The Double-Dealer.
WELL then; the promis'd Hour is come at last;
The present Age of Wit obscures the past:
Strong were our Syres; and as they Fought they Writ,
Conqu'ring with Force of Arms, and Dint of Wit;
Theirs was the Giant Race, before the Flood;
And thus, when
Charles
Return'd, our Empire stood.
Like
Janus
he the stubborn Soil manur'd,
With Rules of Husbandry the Rankness cur'd:
Tam'd us to Manners, when the Stage was rude;
And boistrous
English
Wit, with Art indu'd.
Our Age was cultivated thus at length;
But what we gain'd in Skill, we lost in Strength.
Our Builders were, with Want of Genius, curst;
The Second Temple was not like the First:
'Till You, the best
Vitruvius,
come at length;
Our Beauties equal; but excel our Strength.
Firm
Dorique
Pillars found Your solid Base:
The fair
Corinthian
crowns the higher Space;
Thus all below is Strength, and all above is Grace.
In easie Dialogue is
Fletcher
's Praise:
He mov'd the Mind, but had no Pow'r to raise.
Great
Johnson
did by Strength of Judgment please:
Yet doubling
Fletcher
's Force, he wants his Ease.
In diff'ring Tallents both adorn'd their Age;
One for the Study, t' other for the Stage.
But both to
Congreve
justly shall submit,
One match'd in Judgment, both o'er-match'd in Wit.
In Him all Beauties of this Age we see;
Etherege
his Courtship,
Southern
's Purity;
The Satire, Wit, and Strength of Manly
Witcherly.
All this in blooming Youth you have Atchiev'd;
Now are vour soil'd Contemporaries griev'd;
So much the Sweetness of your Manners move,
We cannot Envy you, because we Love.
Fabius
might ioy in
Scipio,
when he saw
And join his Suffrage to the Votes of
Rome;
Though he with
Hannibal
was overcome.
Thus old
Romano
bow'd to
Raphael
's Fame;
And Scholar to the Youth he taught, became.
Oh that your Brows my Lawrel had sustain'd,
Well had I been Depos'd if You had Reign'd!
The Father had descended for the Son;
For only You are lineal to the Throne.
Thus when the State one
Edward
did depose;
A Greater
Edward
in his Room arose.
But now, not I, but Poetry is curs'd;
For
Tom
the Second reigns like
Tom
the First.
But let'em not mistake my Patron's Part;
Nor call his Charity their own Desert.
Yet this I Prophesie; Thou shalt be seen,
(Tho' with some short Parenthesis between:)
High on the Throne of Wit; and seated there,
Not mine (that's little) but thy Lawrel wear.
Thy first Attempt an early Promise made;
That early Promise this has more than paid.
So bold, yet so judiciously you dare,
That your least Praise, is to be Regular.
Time, Place, and Action, may with Pains be wrought,
But Genius must be born; and never can be taught.
This is Your Portion; this Your Native Store;
Heav'n, that but once was Prodigal before,
To
Shakespeare
gave as much; she cou'd not give him more.
Maintain your Post: That's all the Fame you need;
For 'tis impossible you shou'd proceed.
Already I am worn with Cares and Age;
And just abandoning th' Ungrateful Stage:
Unprofitably kept at Heav'ns Expence,
I live a Rent-charge on his Providence:
But You, whom ev'ry Muse and Grace adorn,
Whom I foresee to better Fortune born,
Be kind to my Remains; and oh defend,
Against your Judgment, your departed Friend!
Let not th' insulting Foe my Fame pursue;
But shade those Lawrels which descend to You:
And take for Tribute what these Lines express:
You merit more; nor cou'd my Love do less.
John Dryden.
PROLOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs.
Bracegirdle.
MOors have this Way (as Story tells) to know
Whether their Brats are truly got, or no;
Into the Sea the New-born Babe is thrown,
There, as Instinct directs, to Swim, or Drawn.
A Barbarous Device, to try if Spouse
Have kept Religiously her Nuptial Vows.
Such are the Trials, Poets make of Plays:
Only they trust to more inconstant Seas;
So, does our Author, this his Child commit
To the Tempestuous Mercy of the Pit,
To know if it be truly born of Wit.
Criticks avaunt; for you are Fish of Prey,
And feed, like Sharks, upon an Infant Play.
Be ev'ry Monster of the Deep away;
Let's have a fair Trial, and a clear Sea.
Let Nature work, and do not Damn too soon,
For Life will struggle long, 'ere it sink down:
Let it at least rise Thrice, before it Drown.
Let us consider, had it been our Fate,
Thus hardly to be prov'd Legitimate!
I will not say, we'd all in Danger been,
Were each to suffer for his Mother's Sin:
But by my Troth I cannot avoid thinking,
How nearly some good Men might have 'scap'd Sinking.
But Heav'n be prais'd, this Custom is confin'd
Alone to th' Offspring of the Muses kind:
Our Christian Cuckolds are more bent to Pity;
I know not one
Moor
-Husband in the City.
I th' Good Man's Arms the Chopping Bastard thrives,
For he thinks all his own, that is his Wives.
Whatever Fate is for this Play design'd
The Poet's sure he shall some Comfort find:
For if his Muse has play'd him false, the worst
That can befall him, is, to be Divorc'd;
You Husbands Judge, if that, be to be Curs'd.
Dramatis Personae.
MEN.
Maskwell,
A Villain; pretended Friend to
Mellefont,
Gallant to Lady
Touchwood,
and in Love with
Cynthia.
Mr.
Betterton.
Lord
Touchwood,
Uncle to
Mellefont,
Mr.
Kynaston.
Mellefont,
Promised to, and in Love with
Cynthia.
Mr.
Williams.
Careless,
his Friend.
Mr.
Alexander.
Lord
Froth,
A Solemn Coxcomb.
Mr.
Bowman.
Brisk,
A Pert Coxcomb
Mr.
Powell.
Sir
Paul Plyant,
An Uxorious, Foolish, old Knight; Brother to Lady
Touchwood,
and Father to
Cynthia.
Mr.
Dogget.
WOMEN.
Lady
Touchwood,
In Love with
Mellefont.
Mrs.
Barrey.
Cynthia,
Daughter to Sir
Paul
by a former Wife, promised to
Mellefont.
Mrs.
Bracegird
Lady
Froth,
A great Cocquet; pretender to Poetry, Wit, and Learning.
Mrs.
Mountfort
Lady
Plyant,
Insolent to her Husband, and easie to any Pretender.
Mrs.
Leigh.
Chaplain, Boy, Footmen,
and
Attendants.
The SCENE, A Gallery in the Lord
Touchwood
's House.
The Time, from Five a Clock to Eight in the Evening.
THE Double-Dealer.
ACT I. SCENE I.
A Gallery in the Ld.
Touchwood's
House with Chambers adjoining.
Enter
Careless,
Crossing the Stage, with his Hat, Gloves, and Sword in his Hands; as just risen from Table:
Mellefont
following him.
NED, Ned,
whither so fast? What, turn'd Flincher! Why, you wo'not leave us?
Where are the Women? Pox I'm weary of guzling, and begin to think them the better Company.
Then thy Reason staggers, and thou'rt almost Drunk.
No Faith, but your Fools grow noisie—and if a Man must endure the Noise of Words without Sense, I think the Women have the more Musical Voices, and become Nonsense better.
Why, they are at the end of the Gallery; retir'd to their Tea, and Scandal; according to their Ancient Custom, after Dinner.—But I made a Pretence of following you, because I had something to say to you in private, and I am not like to have many Opportunities this Evening.
And here's this Coxcomb most Critically come to interrupt you.
Enter
Brisk.
Boys, Boys, Lads, where are you? What do you give Ground? Mortgage for a Bottle, ha?
Careless,
this is your Trick; you're always spoiling Company by leaving it.
And thou art always spoiling Company by coming into't.
Pooh, ha, ha, ha, I know you envy me. Spite, proud Spite, by the Gods! and burning Envy—I'll be judged by
Mellefont
here, who gives and takes Raillery better, you or I. Pox, Man, when I say you spoil Company by leaving it, I mean you leave no Body for the Company to Laugh at. I think there I was with you, ha?
Mellefont.
O' my Word,
Brisk,
that was a home thrust, you have silenc'd him.
Oh, my Dear
Mellefont,
let me perish, if thou art not the Soul of Conversation, the very Essence of Wit, and Spirit of Wine,—The Deuce take me if there were three good Things said, or one understood, since thy Amputation from the body of our Society.—He, I think that's pretty and Metaphorical enough: I'Gad I could not have said it out of thy Company.—
Careless,
ha?
Hum, ay, what is't?
O,
Mon Coeur!
What is't! Nay gad I'll punish you for want of Apprehension: The Duce take me if I tell you.
No, no, hang him, he has no Taste,—But, dear
Brisk,
excuse me, I have a little Business.
Prithee get thee gone; thou see'st we are serious.
We'll come immediately, if you'll but go in, and keep up good Humour and Sense in the Company, prithee do, they'll fall asleep else.
I'gad so they will—Well I will, I will, gad you shall Command me from the
Zenith
to the
Nadir.
—But the Duce take me if I say a good Thing till you come.—But prithee dear Rogue, make haste, prithee make haste, I shall burst else.—And yonder your Uncle, my Lord
Touchwood,
swears he'll Disinherit you, and Sir
Paul Plyant
threatens to disclaim you for a Son-in-Law, and my Lord
Froth
won't Dance at your Wedding to Morrow; nor the Duce take me, I won't Write your Epithalamium—and see what a Condition you're like to be brought to.
Well, I'll speak but three Words, and follow you.
Enough, enough,
Careless,
bring your Apprehension along with you.
[Exit.
Pert Coxcomb.
Faith 'tis a good natur'd Coxcomb, and has very Entertaining Follies—You must be more humane to him; at this Juncture it will do me Service.—I'll tell you, I would have Mirth continued this Day at any Rate; tho' Patience purchase Folly, and Attention be paid with Noise: There are Times when Sense may be unseasonable, as well as Truth. Prithee
Day; but allow
Brisk
to have Wit, that thou may'st seem a Fool
Why, how now, why this extravagant
?
O, I would have no room for
Jealous of a Plot. I would have Noise and
my Lady
Touchwood
's Head from working: For Hell
busie than her Brain, nor
nations.
I thought your Fear of her had been over—
to Morrow appointed for your Marriage with
Cynthia
Father, Sir
Paul Plyant,
come to settle the Writings
purpose?
True; but you shall judge whether I have not Reason to be allarm'd. None besides you, and
Maskwell,
are acquainted with the Secret of my Aunt
Touchwood's
violent Passion for me. Since my first Refusal of her Addresses, she has endeavour'd to do me all ill Offices with my Uncle; yet has manag'd 'em with that Subtilty, that to him they have born the face of Kindness; while her Malice, like a Dark Lanthorn, only shone upon me, where it was directed. Still it gave me less Perplexity to prevent the Success of her Displeasure, than to avoid the Importunities of her Love; and of two Evils, I thought my self favour'd in her Aversion. But whether urg'd by her Despair, and the short Prospect of Time she saw, to accomplish her Designs; whether the Hopes of Revenge, or of her Love, terminated in the View of this my Marriage with
Cynthia,
I know not; but this Morning she surpriz'd me in my Bed.—
Was there ever such a Fury! 'tis well Nature has not put it into her Sexes power to Ravish.—Well, bless us
What follow'd?
What at first amaz'd me; for I look'd to have seen her in all the Transports of a slighted and revengeful Woman: But when I expected Thunder from her Voice, and Lightning in her Eyes; I saw her melted into Tears, and hush'd into a Sigh. It was long before either of us spoke, Passion had ty'd her Tongue, and Amazement mine.—In short, the Consequence was thus, she omitted nothing that the most violent Love could urge, or tender Words express; which when she saw had
but still I pleaded Honour and Nearness of Blood
the Storm I fear'd at first: For
a Fury, she flew to my Sword, and
her doing
her self a Mischief: Having
her; in a Gust of Passion she left me, and in a Resolution, confirm'd by a Thousand Curses, not to close her Eyes, 'till she had seen my Ruin.
Exquisite Woman! But what the Devil does she think, thou hast no more Sense, than to get an Heir upon her Body to disinherit thy self: for as I take it this Settlement upon you, is, with a Proviso, that your Uncle have no Children.
It is so. Well, the Service you are to do me, will be a Pleasure to your self; I must get you to engage my Lady
Plyant
all this Evening, that my Pious Aunt may not work her to her Interest. And if you chance to secure her to your self, you may incline her to mine. She's handsome, and knows it; is very silly, and thinks she has Sense, and has an old fond Husband.
I confess a very fair Foundation, for a Lover to build upon.
For my Lord
Froth,
he and his Wife will be sufficiently taken up, with admiring one another, and
Brisk
's Gallantry, as they call it. I'll observe my Uncle my self; and
Jack Maskwell
has promised me, to watch my Aunt narrowly, and give me notice upon a Suspicion. As for Sir
Paul,
my wise Father-in-Law that is to be, my Dear
Cynthia
has such a share in his Fatherly Fondness he would scarce make her a Moment uneasie, to have her happy hereafter.
So, you have mann'd your Works: but I wish you may not have the weakest Guard, where the Enemy is strongest.
Maskwell,
you mean; prithee why should you suspect him?
Faith I cannot help it, you know I never lik'd him; I am a little Superstitious in Physiognomy.
He has Obligations of Gratitude, to bind him to me; his Dependance upon my Uncle is though my Means.
Upon your Aunt, you mean.
My Aunt!
I'm mistaken if there be not a Familiarity between them, you do not suspect: For all her Passion for you.
Pooh, pooh, nothing in the World but his Design to do me Service; and he endeavours to be well in her Esteem, that he may be able to effect it.
Well, I shall be glad to be mistaken; but, your Aunt's Aversion in her Revenge, cannot be any way so effectually shown, as in bringing forth a Child to disinherit you. She is Handsome and Cunning, and naturally wanton.
Maskwell
is Flesh and Blood at best, and Opportunities between them are frequent. His Affection to you, you have confessed, is grounded upon his Interest, that you have transplanted; and should it take Root in my Lady, I don't see what you can
I confess the Consequence is visible, were your Suspicions just.—But see, the Company is broke up, let's meet 'em.
Enter Lord
Touchwood,
Lord
Froth,
Sir
Paul Plyant,
and
Brisk.
Out upon't, Nephew—Leave your Father-inLaw, and me, to maintain our Ground against Young People.
I beg your Lordship's Pardon—We were just returning.—
Were you, Son? Gadsbud much better as it is—Good, strange! I swear I'm almost Tipsie—t'other Bottle would be too powerful for me,—as sure as can be it would.—We wanted your Company, but Mr.
Brisk
—Where is he? I swear and vow, he's a most facetious Person—and the best Company.—And, my Lord
Froth,
your Lordship is so merry a Man, he, he, he,
O foy, Sir
Paul,
what do you mean? Merry! O Barbarous! I'd as lieve you call'd me Fool.
Nay, I protest and vow now, 'tis true; when Mr.
Brisk
Jokes, your Lordship's Laugh does so become you, he, he, he.
Ridiculous! Sir
Paul,
you're strangely mistaken, I find Champagne is powerful. I assure you, Sir
Paul,
I Laugh at no bodies Jest but my own, or a Ladies; I assure you, Sir
Paul.
How? how, my Lord? what affront my Wit! Let me perish, do I never say any thing worthy to be Laugh'd at?
O foy, don't misapprehend me, I don't say so, for I often smile at your Conceptions. But there is nothing more unbecoming a Man of Quality, than to Laugh; 'tis such a Vulgar Expression of the Passion! every body can Laugh. Then especially to Laugh at the Jest of an Inferior Person, or when any body else of the same Quality does not Laugh with one; Ridiculous! To be pleased with what pleases the Croud! Now when I Laugh, I always Laugh alone.
I suppose that's because you Laugh at your own Jests, I'gad, ha, ha, ha.
He, he, I swear tho', your Raillery provokes me to a Smile.
Ay, my Lord, it's a sign I hit you in the Teeth, if you show 'em.
He, he, he, I swear that's so very pretty, I can't forbear.
I find a Quibble bears more sway in your Lordship's Face, than a Jest.
Sir
Paul,
if you please we'll retire to the Ladies, and drink a Dish of Tea, to settle our Heads.
With all my Heart.—Mr.
Brisk
you'll come to us,—or call me when you're going to Joke, I'll be ready to Laugh incontinently.
[Exit Ld.
Touch,
and Sir
Paul.
But does your Lordship never see Comedies?
O yes, sometimes,—But I never Laugh.
No?
Oh, no,—Never Laugh indeed, Sir.
No! why what d'ye go there for?
To distinguish my self from the Commonalty, and mortifie the Poets; the Fellows grow so Conceited, when any of their foolish Wit prevails upon the Side-Boxes.—I swear,—he, he, he, I have often constrained my Inclinations to Laugh,—he, he, he, to avoid giving them Encouragement.
You are Cruel to your self, my Lord, as well as Malicious to them.
I confess I did my self some Violence at first, but now I think I have Conquer'd it.
Let me perish, my Lord, but there is something very particular in the Humour; 'tis true, it makes against Wit, and I'm sorry for some Friends of mine that Write, but—I'gad, I love to be malicious.—Nay, Deuce take me there's Wit in't too—And Wit must be foil'd by Wit; cut a Diamond with a Diamond; no other way, I'gad.
Oh, I thought you would not be long, before you found out the Wit.
Wit! In what? Where the Devil's the Wit, in not Laughing when a Man has a Mind to't.
O Lord, why can't you find it out?—Why there 'tis, in the not Laughing—Don't you Apprehend me?—My Lord,
Careless
is a very honest Fellow, but harkee,—you understand me, somewhat heavy, a little shallow, or so.—Why I'll tell you now, suppose now you come up to me—Nay, prithee
Careless
be instructed. Suppose, as I was saying, you come up to me holding your Sides, and Laughing, as if you would bepiss your self—I look grave, and ask the Cause of this Immoderate Mirth.—You Laugh on still, and are not able to tell me—Still I look grave, not so much as smile.—
Smile, no, what the Devil should you smile at, when you suppose I can't tell you!
Pshaw, pshaw, prithee don't interrupt me.—But I tell you, you shall tell me—at last—But it shall be a great while first.
Well, but prithee don't let it be a great while, because I long to have it over.
Well then, you tell me some good Jest, or very witty Thing. Laughing all the while as if you were ready to die—and I hear it, and look thus.—Would not you be disappointed?
No; for if it were a witty Thing, I should not expect you to understand it.
O foy, Mr.
Careless,
all the World allow Mr.
Brisk
to have Wit; my Wife says, he has a great deal. I hope you think her a Judge.
Pooh, my Lord, his Voice goes for nothing.—I can't tell how to make him Apprehend.—Take it t'other Way. Suppose I say a witty Thing to you?
Then I shall be disappointed indeed.
Let him alone,
Brisk,
he is obstinately bent not to be Instructed.
I'm sorry for him, the Duce take me.
Shall we go to the Ladies, my Lord?
With all my Heart, methinks we are a Solitude without 'em.
Or, what say you, to another Bottle of Champaign?
O, for the Universe, not a Drop more I beseech you. Oh Intemperate! I have a flushing in my Face already.
[Takes out a Pocket-Glass, and looks in it.
Let me see, let me see, my Lord, I broke my Glass that was in the Lid of my Snuff-Box. Hum! Deuce take me, I have encourag'd a Pimple here too.
[Takes the Glass and looks.
Then you must mortifie him with a Patch; my Wife shall supply you. Come, Gentlemen,
allons.
[Exeunt.
Enter Lady
Touchwood,
and
Maskwell.
I'll hear no more.—Y'are False and Ungrateful; come, I know you false.
I have been frail, I confess, Madam, for your Ladyship's Service.
That I should trust a Man, whom I had known betray his Friend!
What Friend have I betray'd? Or to whom?
Your fond Friend
Mellefont,
and to me; can you deny it?
I do not.
Have you not wrong'd my Lord, who has been a Father to you in your Wants, and given you Being? Have you not wrong'd him in the highest manner, in his Bed?
With your Ladyship's Help, and for your Service, as I told you before. I can't deny that neither.—Any thing more, Madam?
More! Audacious Villain. O, what's more, is most my Shame,—Have you not dishonour'd me?
No, that I deny; for I never told in all my Life: So that Accusation's answer'd; on to the next.
Death, do you dally with my Passion? Insolent Devil! But have a care,—Provoke me not; for, by the Eternal Fire, you shall not 'scape my Vengeance.—Calm Villain! How unconcern'd he stands, confessing Treachery, and Ingratitude! Is there a Vice more black!—O I have Excuses, Thousands for my Faults; Fire in my Temper, Passions in my Soul, apt to ev'ry Provocation; oppressed at once with Love, and with Despair. But a sedate, a thinking Villain, whose Black Blood runs temperately bad, what Excuse can clear? One, who is no more moved with the Reflection of his Crimes, than of his Face; but walks unstartled from the Mirrour, and straight forgets the hideous Form.
Will you be in Temper, Madam? I would not talk not to be heard. I have been
[She walks about Disorder'd]
a very great Rogue for your sake, and you reproach me with it; I am ready to be a Rogue still, to do you Service; and you are flinging Conscience and Honour in my Face, to rebate my Inclinations. How am I to behave my self? You know I am your Creature, my Life and Fortune i
your Power; to disoblige you, brings me certain Ruin. Allow it, I would betray you, I would not be a Traitor to my self: I don't pretend to Honesty, because you know I am a Rascal: But I would convince you, from the Necessity of my being firm unto you.
Necessity, Impudence! Can no Gratitude incline you, no Obligations touch you? Have not my Fortune, and my Person, been subjected to your Pleasure? Were you not in the nature of a Servant, and have not I in effect made you Lord of all, of me, and of my Lord? Where is that humble Love, the Languishing, that Adoration, which once was paid me, and everlastingly engaged?
Fixt, Rooted in my Heart, whence nothing can re
Nay, Misconceive me not, Madam, when I say I have had a Gen'rous, and a Faithful Passion, which you had never favour'd, but through Revenge and Policy.
Ha!
Look you, Madam, we are alone,—Pray contain your self, and hear me. You know you lov'd your Nephew, when I first sigh'd for you; I quickly found it an Argument that I Lov'd; for with that Art you veil'd your Passion, 'twas imperceptible to all but Jealous Eyes. This Discovery made me bold; I confess it; for by it, I thought you in my Power. Your Nephew's Scorn of you, added to my Hopes; I watch'd the Occasion, and took you, just Repulsed by him, warm at once with Love and Indignation; your Disposition, my Arguments, and happy Opportunity, accomplish'd my Design; I prest the yielding Minute, and was blest. How I have lov'd you since, Words have not shown, then how should Words express.
Well, mollifying Devil!—And have I not met your Love with forward Fire?
Your Zeal I grant was Ardent, but misplac'd; there was Revenge in view; that Woman's Idol had defil'd the Temple of the God, and Love was made a Mock-Worship.—A Son and Heir would have edg'd young
Mellefont
upon the Brink of Ruin, and left him none but you to catch at for Prevention.
Again, provoke me! Do you wind me like a Larum, only to rouse my own still'd Soul for your Diversion? Confusion!
Nay, Madam, I'm gone, if you Relapse,—Wh
t needs this? I say nothing but what you your self, in open Hours of Love, have told me. Why should you deny it? Nay, how can you? Is not all this present Heat owing to the same Fire? Do you not Love him still? How have I this Day offended you, but in not breaking off his Match with
Cynthia?
Which e'er to Morrow shall be done,—had you but Patience.
How, what said you
Maskwell,
—Another Caprice, to unwind my Temper.
By Heav'n, no; I am your Slave, the Slave of all your Pleasures; and will not rest 'till I have given you Peace, would you suffer me.
O,
Maskwell,
in vain I do disguise me from thee, thou know'st me, know'st the very inmost Windings and Recesses of my Soul.—Oh
Mellefont!
I burn; Married to Morrow! Despair strikes me. Yet my Soul knows I hate him too: Let him but once be mine, and next immediate Ruin seize him.
Compose your self, You shall Enjoy and Ruin him too,—Will that please you?
How, how? Thou dear, thou precious Villain, how?
You have already been tampering with my Lady
Plyant.
I have: She is ready for any Impression I think fit.
She must be throughly persuaded, that
Mellefont
Loves her.
She is so Credulous that way naturally, and likes him so well, that she will believe it faster than I can persuade her. But I don't see what you can propose from such a trifling Design; for her first Conversing with
Mellefont,
will convince her of the contrary.
I know it.—I don't depend upon it.—But it will prepare something else; and gain us Leisure to lay a stronger Plot: If I gain a little Time, I shall not want Contrivance.
One Minute, gives Invention to Destroy,
What, to Rebuild, will a whole Age Employ.
[Exeunt.
End of the First Act.
ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Lady
Froth,
and
Cynthia.
INdeed, Madam! Is it possible your Ladyship could have been so much in Love?
I could not sleep; I did not sleep one Wink for Three Weeks together.
Prodigious! I wonder, Want of Sleep, and so much Love, and so much Wit as your Ladyship has, did not turn your Brain.
O my Dear
Cynthia,
you must not rally your Friend,—But really, as you say, I wonder too,—But then I had a Way.—For between you and I, I had Whimsies and Vapours, but I gave them Vent.
How pray, Madam?
O I Writ. Writ abundantly,—Dovonever Write?
Write, what?
Songs, Elegies, Satires, Encomiums, Panegyricks, Lampoons, Plays, or Heroick Poems.
O Lord, not I, Madam; I'm content to be a Courteous Reader.
O Inconsistent! In Love, and not Write! if my Lord and I had been both of your Temper, we had never come together,—O bless me! What a sad thing would that have been, if my Lord and I should never have met!
Then neither my Lord nor you would never have met with your Match, on my Conscience.
O' my Conscience no more we should; thou say'st right—For sure my Lord
Froth
is as fine a Gentleman, and as much a Man of Quality! Ah! Nothing at all of the Common Air,—I think I may say he wants nothing, but a Blue Ribbon and a Star, to make him shine, the very Phosphorus of our Hemisphere. Do you understand those Two hard Words? If you don't, I'll explain 'em to you.
Yes, yes, Madam, I'm not so Ignorant.—At least I won't own it, to be troubled with your Instructions.
[Aside.
Nay, I beg your Pardon; but being Deriv'd from the
Greek,
I thought you might have escap'd the Etymology.—But I'm the more amaz'd, to find you a Woman of Letters, and not Write! Bless me! how
Mellefont
believe you Love him?
Why Faith, Ma
, he that won't take my Word, shall never have it under my Ha
I vow
Mellefont
pretty Gentleman, but methinks he wants a Manner.
A Manner! what's that, Madam?
Some distinguishing Quality, as for Example, the
Belleair
or
Brillant
of Mr.
Brisk;
the Solemnity, yet Complaisance of my Lord, or something of his own that should look a little
Jene-scay-quoysh;
he is too much a Mediocrity, in my Mind.
He does not indeed affect either Pertness or Formality; for which I like him: Here he comes.
And my Lord with him: Pray observe the Difference.
Enter Lord
Froth, Mellefont, Brisk.
Impertinent Creature, I could almost be angry with her now.
[Aside.
My Lord, I have been telling
Cynthia,
how much I have been in Love with you; I swear I have; I'm not asham'd to own it now; Ah! it makes my Heart leap, I vow I sigh when I think on't: My dear Lord! Ha, ha, ha, do you remember, my Lord?
[Squeezes him by the Hand, looks kindly on him, Sighs and then Laughs out.
Pleasant Creature! perfectly well, ah! that Look, ay, there it is; who could resist! 'twas so my Heart was made a Captive first, and ever since t' has been in Love with happy Slavery.
O that Tongue, that dear deceitful Tongue! that Charming Softness in your Mien and your Expression, and then your Bow! Good my Lord, bow as you did when I gave you my Picture, here suppose this my Picture—
[Gives him a Pocket-Glass,
Pray mind my Lord; ah! he bows Charmingly; nay, my Lord, you shan't kiss it so much; I shall grow jealous, I vow now.
[He bows profoundly low, then kisses the Glass.
I saw my self there, and kiss'd it for your Sake.
Ah! Gallantry to the last Degree—Mr.
Brisk,
you're a Judge; was ever any Thing so well bred as my Lord?
Never any thing; but your Ladyship, let me perish.
O prettily turn'd again; let me die but you have a great deal of Wit: Mr.
Mellefont,
don't you think Mr.
Brisk
has a World of Wit?
O, yes, Madam.
O dear, Madam—
An infinite deal!
O Heav'ns, Madam—
More Wit than any Body.
I'm everlastingly your humble Servant, Duce take me, Madam.
Don't you think us a happy Couple?
I vow, my Lord, I think you the happiest Couple in the World, for you're not only happy in one another, and when you are together, but happy in your selves, and by your selves.
I hope
Mellefont
will make a good Husband too.
'Tis my Interest to believe he will, my Lord.
D'e think he'll Love you as well as I do my W
? I'm afraid not.
I believe he'll Love me better.
Heav'ns! that can never be; but why do you think so?
Because he has not so much reason to be fond of himself.
O your humble Servant for that, dear Madam; well,
Mellefont,
you'll be a happy Creature.
Ay, my Lord, I shall have the same Reason for my Happiness that your Lordship has, I shall think my self happy.
Ah, that's all.
(to Lady
Froth.
)
Your Ladyship is in the right; but I'gad I'm wholly turn'd into Satire. I confess I Write but seldom, but when I do—keen
Iambicks
I'gad. But my Lord was telling me, your Ladyship has made an Essay toward an Heroick Poem.
Did my Lord tell you? Yes I vow, and the Subject is my Lord's Love to me. And what do you think I call it? I dare swear you won't guess—
The Sillibub,
ha, ha, ha.
Because my Lord's Title's
Froth,
I'gad, ha, ha, ha, Deuce take me very
a Propos
and Surprizing, ha, ha, ha.
He, Ay, is not it?—And then I call my Lord
Spumoso;
and my self, what d'e think I call my self?
Lactilla
may be,—'gad I cannot tell.
Biddy,
that's all; just my own Name.
Biddy!
I'gad very pretty—Deuce take me if your Ladyship has not the Art of surprizing the most Naturally in the World,—I hope you'll make me happy in Communicating the Poem.
O, you must be my Confident, I must ask your Advice.
I'm your humble Servant, let me perish,—I presume your Ladyship has read
Bossu?
O yes, and
Rapine,
and
Dacier
upon
Aristotle
and
Horace.
—My Lord, you must not be Jealous, I'm Communicating all to Mr.
Brisk.
No, no, I'll allow Mr.
Brisk;
have you nothing about you to shew him, my Dear?
Yes, I believe I have.—Mr.
Brisk,
come will you go into the next Room? and there I'll shew you what I have.
Exit
L. Froth
and
Brisk.
I'll walk a Turn in the Garden, and come to you.
[Exit.
You're thoughtful,
Cynthia?
I'm thinking, tho' Marriage makes Man and Wife one Flesh, it leaves 'em still Two Fools; and they become more Conspicuous by setting off one another.
That's only when Two Fools meet, and their Follies are oppos'd.
sition of their Wits, render themselves as ridiculous as Fools. 'Tis an odd Game we're going to Play at: What think you of drawing Stakes, and giving over in time?
No, hang't, that's not endeavouring to win, because it's possible we may loose; since we have Shuffled and Cutt, let's e'en turn up Trump now.
Then I find it's like Cards, if either of us have a good Hand it is an Accident of Fortune.
No, Marriage is rather like a Game at Bowls, Fortune indeed makes the Match, and the Two nearest, and sometimes the Two farthest are together, but the Game depends intirely upon Judgement.
Still it is a Game, and consequently one of us must be a Loser.
Not at all; only a Friendly Trial of Skill, and the Winnings to be Shared between us.—What's here, the Musick
—Oh, my Lord has promised the Company a new Song, we'll get 'em to give it us by the way.
[Musicians crossing the Stage.
Pray let us have the Favour of you, to practice the Song, before the Company hear it.
SONG.
I.
CYnthia
frowns when e'er I Woo her,
Yet she's vext if I give over;
Much she fears I should undo her,
But much more to lose her Lover:
Thus, in doubting, she refuses;
And not Winning, thus she Loses.
II
Prithee
Cynthia
look behind you,
Age and Wrinkles will o'ertake you;
Then too late Desire will find you,
When the Power does forsake you:
Think, O think o'th' sad Condition,
To be past, yet wish Fruition.
You shall have my Thanks below.
[To the Musick, they go out
Enter Sir
Paul Plyant,
and Lady
Plyant.
Gads bud! I am provok'd into a Fermentation, as my Lady
Froth
says; was ever the like read of in Story?
Pray your Ladyship give me leave to be Angry—I'll rattle him up I warrant you, I'll firk him with a
Certiorari.
You firk him, I'll firk him my self; pray Sir
Paul
hold you contented.
Bless me, what makes my Father in such a Passion!—I never saw him thus before.
Hold your self contented, my Lady
Plyant,
—I find Passion coming upon me by Inspiration, and I cannot submit as formerly, therefore give way.
How now! will you be pleased to retire, and—
No marry will I not be pleased, I am pleased to be angry, that's my Pleasure at this time.
What can this mean!
Gads my Life, the Man's distracted, why how now, who are you? What am I? Slidikins can't I govern you? What did I Marry you for? Am I not to be absolute and uncontrolable? Is it fit a Woman of my Spirit, and Conduct, should be contradicted in a Matter of this Concern?
It concerns me, and only me;—Besides, I'm not to be govern'd at all times. When I am in Tranquility, my Lady
Plyant
shall command Sir
Paul;
but when I am provok'd to Fury, I cannot incorporate with Patience and Reason,—as soon may Tygers match with Tygers, Lambs with Lambs, and every Creature couple with its Foe, as the Poet says.—
He's hot-headed still! 'Tis in vain to talk to you; but remember I have a Curtain-Lecture for you, you disobedient, headstrong Brute.
No, 'tis because I won't be headstrong, because I won't be a Brute, and have my Head fortify'd, that I am thus exasperated,—But I will protect my Honour, and yonder is the Violater of my Fame.
'Tis my Honour that is concern'd, and the Violation was intended to me. Your Honour! You have none but what is in my keeping, and I can dispose of it when I please—therefore don't provoke me.
Hum, gads-bud she says true.—Well, my Lady, March on, I will fight under you then: I am convinced, as far as Passion will permit.
[L
Plyant
and Sir
Paul
come up to
Mellefont.
Inhuman and Treacherous.
Thou Serpent and first Tempter of Womankind.—
Bless me! Sir; Madam; what mean you?
Thy, Thy,
come away
Thy,
touch him not, come hither Girl, go not near him, there's nothing but Deceit about him; Snakes are in his Peruke, and the Crocodile of
Nilus
in his Belly, he will eat thee up alive.
Dishonourable, impudent Creature!
For Heav'ns sake, Madam, to whom do you direct this Language!
Have I hehav'd my self with all the Decorum and Niccty, befitting the Person of Sir
Paul
's Wife? Have I preserv'd my Honour as it were in a Snow-House for these three Years past? Have I been white and unsully'd even by Sir
Paul
himself?
Nay, she has been an impenetrable Wife, even to me, that's the truth on't.
Have I, I say, preserv'd my self, like a fair Sheet of Paper, for you to make a Blot upon?—
And she shall make a Simile with any Woman in
England.
I am so amaz'd, I know not what to speak.
Do you think my Daughter, this pretty Creature; gads-bud she's a Wife for a Cherubin! Do you think her fit for nothing but to be a stalking Horse, to stand before you, while you take Aim at my Wife? Gads-bud I was never angry before in my Life, and I'll never be appeas'd again.
Hell and Damnation! This is my Aunt; such Malice can be engendred no where else.
[Aside.
Sir
Paul,
take
Cynthia
from his Sight; leave me to strike him with the Remorse of his intended Crime.
Pray, Sir, stay, hear him, I dare affirm he's Innocent.
Innocent! Why hark'ee, come hither
Thy,
hark'ee, I had it from his Aunt, my Sister
Touchwood,
—gads-bud he does not care a Farthing for any Thing of thee, but thy Portion, why he's in love with my Wife; he would have tantaliz'd thee, and made a Cuckold of thy poor Father,—and that would certainly have broke my Heart—I'm sure if ever I should have Horns, they would kill me; they would never come kindly, I should die of 'em, like a Child, that was cutting his Teeth—I should indeed,
Thy
—therefore come away; but Providence has prevented all, therefore come away, when I bid you.
I must Obey.
[Exit Sir
Paul
and
Cynthia.
O, such a thing! the Impiety of it startles me—to wrong so good, so fair a Creature, and one that lov'd you tenderly—'tis a Barbarity of Barbarities, and nothing could be guilty of it—
But the greatest Villain Imagination can form, I grant it; and next to the Villany of such a Fact, is the Villany of aspersing me with the Guilt. How? which way was I to wrong her? For yet I understand you not.
Why, gads my Life, Cousin
Mellefont,
you cannot be so peremptory as to deny it; when I tax you with it to your Face; for now Sir
Paul
's gone, you are
Corum Nobus.
By Heav'n, I love her more than Life, or—
Fiddle, faddle, don't tell me of this and that, and ev'ry Thing in the World, but give me Mathemacular Demonstration, answer me directly—But I have not Patience—Oh! The Impiety of it, as I was saying, and the unparallell'd Wickedness! O Merciful Father! How could you think to reverse Nature so, to make the Daughter the Means of procuring the Mother?
The Daughter to procure the Mother!
Ay, for tho' I am not
Cynthia
's own Mother, I am her Father's Wife; and that's near enough to make it Incest.
Incest! O my precious Aunt, and the Devil in Conjunction.
[Aside.
O reflect upon the Horror of that, and then the Guilt of deceiving ev'ry Body; Marrying the Daughter, only to make a Cuckold of the Father; and then seducing me, debauching my Purity, and perverting me from the Road of Virtue, in which I have trod thus long, and never made one Trip, not one
faux pas;
O consider it, what would you have to answer for, if you should provoke me to Frailty? Alas! Humanity is feeble, Heav'n knows! very feeble, and unable to support it self.
Where am I? sure, is it Day? and am I awake, Madam?
And no Body knows how Circumstances may happen together,—To my thinking, now I could resist the strongest Temptation,—But yet I know, 'tis impossible for me to know whether I could or not, there's no certainty in the Things of this Life.
Madam, pray give me leave to ask you one Question.—
O Lord, ask me the Question, I'll swear I'll refuse it; I swear I'll deny it.—therefore don't ask me, nay you shan't ask me, I swear I'll deny it. O Gemini, you have brought all the Blood into my Face; I warrant I am as Red as a Turky-Cock; O fie, Cousin
Mellefont!
Nay, Madam, hear me; I mean—
Hear you, no, no; I'll deny you first, and hear you afterwards: or one does not know how ones Mind may change upon hearing—Hearing is one of the Senses, and all the Senses are fallible; I won't trust my Honour, I assure you; my Honour
For Heav'n's sake, Madam,—
O name it no more—Bless me, how can talk of Heav'n! and have so much Wickedness in your Heart? May be you don't think it a Sin,—They say some of you Gentlemen don't think it a Sin,—May be it is no Sin to them that don't think it so;—Indeed, if I did not think it a Sin—But still my Honour, if it were no Sin,—But then, to marry my Daughter, for the Conveniency of frequent Opportunities,—I'll never consent to that, as sure as can be, I'll break the Match.
Death and Amazement,—Madam, upon my Knees—
Nay, nay, rise up, come you shall see my good Nature. I know Love is powerful, and no Body can help his Passion: 'Tis not your Fault; nor I swear it is not mine,—How can I help it, if I have Charms? And how can you help it, if you are made a Captive? I swear it's pity it should be a Fault,—But my Honour—well, but your Honour too—but the Sin!—well but the Necessity—O Lord, here's some Body coming, I dare not stay. Well, you must consider of your Crime; and strive as much as can be against it,—strive be sure—But don't be melancholy, don't despair,—But never think that I'll grant you any Thing; O Lord, no;—But be sure you lay aside all Thoughts of the Marriage, for tho' I know you don't Love
Cynthia,
only as a blind for your Passion to me; yet it will make me Jealous,—O Lord, what did I say? Jealous! no, no, I can't be Jealous, for I must not Love you,—therefore don't hope,—But don't despair neither,—O, they're coming, I must fly.
[Exit.
(after a Pause,)
So then,—spight of my Care and Foresight, I am caught, caught in my Security,—Yet this was but a shallow Artifice, unworthy of my Matchiavilian Aunt: There must be more behind, this is but the first Flash, the priming of her Engine; Destruction follows hard, if not most presently prevented.
Enter
Maskwell.
Maskwell,
welcome, thy Presence is a View of Land, appearing to my shipwrack'd Hopes: The Witch has rais'd the Storm, and her Ministers have done their Work; you see the Vessels are parted.
I know it; I met Sir
Paul
rowing away
Cynthia:
Come, trouble not your Head, I'll join you together e'er to Morrow Morning, or drown between you in the Attempt.
There's Comfort in a Hand stretch'd out, to one that's sinking; tho' ne'er so far off.
No Sinking, nor no Danger,—Come, cheer up; why you don't know, that while I Plead for you, your Aunt has given me a retaining Fee;—Nay, I am your greatest Enemy, and she does but Journey-Work under me.
Ha! How's this?
What d'ye think of being employ'd in the Execution of all her Plots? Ha, ha, ha, by Heav'n it's true; I have undertaken to break the Match, I have undertaken to make your Uncle Disinherit you, to get you turn'd out of Doors; and to—Ha, ha, ha, I can't tell you for Laughing,—Oh she has open'd her Heart to me,—I am to turn you a Grazing, and to—Ha, ha, ha, Marry
Cynthia
my self; there's a Plot for you.
Ha! O see, I see my rising Sun! Light breaks thro' Clouds upon me, and I shall live in Day—O my
Maskwell!
How shall I thank or praise thee; Thou hast out-witted Woman.—But tell me, how could'st thou thus get into her Confidence?—Ha! How? But was it her Contrivance to persuade my Lady
Plyant
to this evtravagant Belief?
It was, and to tell you the Truth, I encourag'd it for your Diversion: Tho' it made you a little uneasie for the present, yet the Reflection of it must needs be entertaining,—I warrant she was very Violent at first.
Ha, ha, ha, I, a very Fury; but I was most afraid of her Violence at last,—If you had not come as you did; I don't know what she might have attempted.
Ha, ha, ha, I know her Temper.—Well, you must know then, that all my Contrivances were but Bubbles; 'till at last I pretended to have been long secretly in Love with
Cynthia;
that did my Business; that convinc'd your Aunt, I might be trusted; since it was as much my Interest as hers to break the Match: Then she thought my Jealousie might qualifie me to assist her in her Revenge. And, in short, in that Belief, told me the Secrets of her Heart. At length we made this Agreement, if I accomplish her Designs (as I told you before) she has ingag'd to put
Cynthia
with all her Fortune into my Power.
She is most Gracious in her Favour,—Well, and dear
Jack,
how hast thou Contrived?
I would not have you stay to hear it now; for I don't know, but she may come this Way; I am to meet her anon, after that I'll tell you the whole Matter; be here in this Gallery an Hour hence, by that time I imagine our Consultation may be over.
I will; 'till then Success attend thee.
[Exit.
'Till then, Success will attend me; for when I meet you, I meet the only Obstacle to my Fortune.
Cynthia,
let thy Beauty gild my Crimes; and whatsoever I commit of Treachery or Deceit, shall be imputed to me as a Merit—Treachery, what Treachery? Love cancels all the Bonds of Friendship, and sets Men right upon their first Foundations.
Duty to Kings, Piety to Parents, Gratitude to Benefactors, and Fidelity to Friends, are different and particular Ties: But the Name of Rival cuts 'em all asunder, and is a general Acquittance—Rival is equal, and Love like Death an universal Leveller of Mankind. Ha! But is there not such a Thing as Honesty? Yes, and whosoever has it about him, bears an Enemy in his Breast: For your Honest Man, as I take it, is that nice, scrupulous, conscientious Person, who will cheat no Body but himself; such another Coxcomb, as your Wise Man, who is too hard for all the World, and will be made a Fool of by no body, but himself: Ha, ha, ha. Well for Wisdom and Honesty, give me Cunning and Hypocrisie; oh, 'tis such a Pleasure, to angle for fairfac'd Fools! Then that hungry Gudgeon Credulity, will bite at any thing—Why, let me see, I have the same Face, the same Words and Accents, when I speak what I do think; and when I speak what I do not think—the very same—and dear Dissimulation is the only Art, not to be known from Nature.
Why will Mankind be Fools, and be deceiv'd?
And why are Friends and Lovers Oaths believ'd?
When each, who searches strictly his own Mind,
May so much Fraud and Power of Baseness find.
The End of the Second Act.
ACT III. SCENE I.
Enter Lord
Touchwood,
and Lady
Touchwood.
MY Lord, can you blame my Brother
Plyant,
if he refuse his Daughter upon this Provocation? The Contract's void by this unheard of Impiety.
I don't believe it true; he has better Principles—Pho, 'tis Nonsense. Come, come, I know my Lady
Plyant
has a large Eye, and wou'd centre every Thing in her own Circle; 'tis not the first time she has mistaken Respect for Love, and made Sir
Paul
jealous of the Civility of an undesigning Person, the better to bespeak his Security in her unfeigned Pleasures.
You censure hardly, my Lord; my Sister's Honour is very well known.
Yes, I believe I know some that have been familiarly acquainted with it. This is a little Trick wrought by some pitiful Contriver, envious of my Nephew's Merit.
Nay, my Lord, it may be so, and I hope it will be found so: But that will require some time; for in such a Case as this, Demonstration is necessary.
There should have been Demonstration of the contrary too, before it had been believ'd—
So I suppose there was.
How? Where? When?
That I can't tell; nay I don't say there was—I am willing to believe as favourably of my Nephew as I can.
I don't know that.
[Half Aside.
How? Don't you believe that, say you, my Lord?
No, I don't say so—I confess I am troubled to find you so cold in his Defence.
His Defence! Bless me, wou'd you have me defend an ill Thing.
You believe it then?
I don't know; I am very unwilling to speak my Thoughts in any Thing that may be to my Cousin's Disadvantage; besides, I find, my Lord you are prepared to receive an ill Impression from any Opinion of mine which is not consenting with your own: But since I am like to be suspected in the End, and 'tis a Pain any longer to dissemble, I own it to you; in short I do believe it, nay, and can believe any thing worse, if it were laid to his Charge—Don't ask me my Reasons, my Lord, for they are not fit to be told you.
I'm amaz'd, here must be something more than ordinary in this.
[Aside.]
Not fit to be told me, Madam? You can have no Interests, wherein I am not concern'd, and consequently the same Reasons ought to be convincing to me, which create your Satissaction or Disquiet.
But those which cause my Disquiet, I am willing to have remote from your hearing. Good my Lord, don't press me.
Don't oblige me to press you.
Whatever it was, 'tis past: And that is better to be unknown which cannot be prevented; therefore let me beg you rest satisfied—
When you have told me, I will—
You won't.
By my Life, my Dear, I will.
What if you can't.
How? Then I must know, nay I will: No more trifling—I charge you tell me—By all our Mutual Peace to come; upon your Duty—
Nay, my Lord, you need say no more, to make me lay my Heart before you, but don't be thus transported; compose your self: It is not of Concern, to make you lose one Minute's Temper. 'Tis not indeed my Dear. Nay, by this Kiss you shan't be angry. O Lord, I wish I had not told you any thing.—Indeed, my Lord, you have frighted me. Nay, look pleas'd, I'll tell you.
Well, well.
Nay, but will you be calm—indeed it's nothing but—
But what?
But will you promise me not to angry—Nay you must—Not to be angry with
Mellefont
—I dare swear he's sorry—and were it to do again, would not—
Sorry, for what? 'Death, you rack me with Delay.
Nay, no great Matter, only—Well I have your Promise—Pho, why nothing, only your Nephew had a mind to amuse himself, sometimes with a little Gallantry towards me. Nay, I can't think he meant any thing seriously, but methought it look'd odly.
Confusion and Hell, what do I hear!
Or, may be, he thought he was not enough a-kin to me, upon your Account, and had a mind to create a nearer Relation on his own; a Lover you know, my Lord—Ha, ha, ha. Well but that's all—Now you have it; well remember your Promise, my Lord, and don't take any Notice of it to him.
No, no, no—Damnation!
Nay, I swear you must not—A little harmless Mirth—Only misplac'd, that's all—But if it were more, 'tis over now, and all's well. For my Part I have forgot it; and so has he, I hope—for I have not heard any thing from him these Two Days.
These Two Days! Is it so fresh? Unnatural Villain! Death, I'll have him stripp'd and turn'd naked out of my Doors this Moment, and let him rot and perish, incestuous Brute!
O for Heav'ns sake, my Lord, you'll ruin me if you take such publick Notice of it, it will be a Town-talk: Consider your own and my Honour—nay, I told you you would not be satisfied when you knew it.
Before I've done, I will be satisfy'd. Ungrateful Monster, how long?—
Lord, I don't know: I wish my Lips had grown together when I told you—Almost a Twelvemonth—Nay, I won't tell you any more, 'till you are your self. Pray, my Lord, don't let the Company see you in this Disorder—Yet, I confess, I can't blame you; for I think I was never so surpriz'd in my Life—Who would have thought my Nephew could have so misconstrued my Kindness—But will you go into your Closet, and recover your Temper. I'll make an Excuse of sudden Business to the Company, and come to you. Pray, good dear my Lord, let me beg you do now: I'll come immediately, and tell you all; will you, my Lord?
I will—I am mute with Wonder.
Well but go now, here's some body coming.
Well I go—You won't stay, for I would hear more of this.
[Exit
Ld.
Touch.
I follow instantly—So.
Enter
Maskwell.
This was a Master-Piece, and did not need my Help—tho' I stood ready for a Cue to come in and confirm all, had ther been Occasion.
Have you seen
Mellefont?
I have; and am to meet him here about this time.
How does he bear his Disappointment?
Secure in my Assistance, he seem'd not much afflicted
but rather laugh'd at the shallow Artifice, which so little tim
must of necessity discover. Yet he is apprehensive of some farther Design of yours, and has engaged me to watch you. I believe he will hardly be able to prevent your Plot,
have you use Caution and Expedition.
Expedition indeed; for all we do,
the remaining Part of this Ev'ning and before the Company break up, lest my Lord should cool, and have an Opportunity to talk with him privately—My Lord must not see him again.
By no Means; therefore you must aggravate my Lord's Displeasure to a Degree that will admit of no Conference with him.—What think you of mentioning me?
How?
To my Lord, as having been privy to
Mellefont
's Design upon you, but still using my utmost Endeavours to dissuade him: Tho' my Friendship and Love to him has made me conceal it; yet you may say, I threatned the next time he attempted any thing of that kind, to discover it to my Lord.
To what end is this?
It will confirm my Lord's Opinion of my Honour and Honesty, and create in him a new Confidence in me, which (should this Design miscarry) will be necessary to the forming another Plot that I have in my Head—To cheat you, as well as therest.
Aside.
I'll do it—I'll tell him you hindred him once from forcing me.
Excellent! Your Ladyship has a most improving Fancy. You had best go to my Lord, keep him as long as you can in his Closet, and I doubt not but you will mould him to what you please; your Guests are so engaged in their own Follies and Intrigues, they'll miss neither of you.
When shall we meet?—At Eight this Ev'ning in my Chamber; there rejoice at our Success, and toy away an Hour in Mirth.
I will not fail.
[Exit
L.
Touchwood.
I know what she means by toying away an Hour well enough. Pox I have lost all Appetite to her; yet she's a fine Woman, and I lov'd her once. But I don't know, since I have been in a great measure kept by her, the Case is alter'd; what was my Pleasure is become my Duty: And I have as little Stomach to her now as if I were her Husband. Should she smoke my Design upon
Cynthia,
I were in a fine pickle. She has a damn'd penetrating Head, and knows how to interpret a Coldness the right Way; therefore I must dissemble Ardour and Ecstasie, that's resolv'd: How easily and pleasantly is that dissembled before Fruition! Pox on't that a Man can't drink without quenching his Thirst. Ha! yonder comes
Mellefont
thoughtful. Let me think: Meet her at Eight—hum—ha! By Heav'n I have it—If I can speak to my Lord before—Was it my Brain or Providence? No matter which—I will deceive 'em all, and yet secure my self, 'twas a lucky Thought! Well this Double-Dealing is a Jewel.
Here he comes
[
Maskwell
pretending not to see him, walks by him, and speaks as it were to himself.
Enter
Mellefont
musing.
Mercy on us, what will the Wickedness of this World come to?
How now,
Jack?
What so full of Contemptation that you run over!
I'm glad you're come, for I could not contain my self any longer: And was just going to give vent to a Secret, which no Body but you ought to drink down.—Your Aunt's just gone from hence.
And having trusted thee with the Secrets of her Soul, thou art villainously bent to discover 'em all to me, ha?
I'm afraid my Frailty leans that way—But I don't know whether I can in Honour discover all.
All, all Man, what you may in Honour betray her as far as she betrays her self. No tragical Design upon my Person I hope.
No, but it's a Comical Design upon mine.
What dost thou mean?
Listen, and be Dumb, we have been bargaining about the Rate of your Ruin—
Like any Two Guardians to an Orphan Heiress—Well.
And whereas Pleasure is generally paid with Mischief, what Mischief I do is to be paid with Pleasure.
So when you've swallow'd the Potion, you sweeten your Mouth with a Plumb.
You are Merry, Sir, but I shall probe your Constitution. In short, the Price of your Banishment is to be paid with the Person of—
Of
Cynthia,
and her Fortune—Why you forget you told me this before.
No, no—So far you are right; and I am, as an earnest of that Bargain, to have full and free Possession of the Person of—your Aunt.
Ha!—Pho, you trifle.
By this Light, I'm serious; all Raillery apart—I knew 'twould stun you: This Evening at Eight she will receive me in her Bed-Chamber.
Hell and the Devil, is she abandon'd of all Grace—Why the Woman is possess'd—
Well, will you
By Heav'n into a hot
you would not—
would not be so conve
What d'ye mean!
Mean? Not to disappoint the Lady I assure you—Ha, ha, ha, how gravely he looks—Come, come, I wont perplex you. 'Tis the only Thing that Providence could have contriv'd to make me capable of serving you, either to my Inclination or your own Necessity.
How, how, for Heav'ns sake, dear
Maskwell?
Why thus—I'll go according to Appointment; you shall have Notice at the critical Minute to come and surprize your Aunt and me together: Counterfeit a Rage against me, and I'll make my Escape through the private Passage from her Chamber, which I'll take care to leave open: 'twill be hard, if then you can't bring her to any Conditions. For this Discovery will disarm her of all Defence, and leave her entirely at your Mercy: Nay, she must ever after be in awe of you.
Let me adore thee, my better
Genius!
By Heav'n I think it is not in the Power of Fate to disappoint my Hopes—My Hopes, my Certainty!
Well, I'll meet you here, within a Quarter of Eight, and give you notice.
[Exit
Good Fortune ever go along with thee.
Enter to him
Careless.
Mellefont,
get out o'th' Way, my Lady
Plyant
's coming, and I shall never succeed while thou art in sight—Tho' she begins to tack about; but I made Love a great while to no purpose.
Why, what's the Matter? She's convinc'd that I don't care for her.
'Pox I can't get an Answer from her, that does not begin with her Honour, or her Virtue, her Religion, or some such Cant. Then she has told me the whole History of Sir
Paul
's Nine Years Courtship; how he has lain for whole Nights together upon the Stairs, before her Chamber-Door; and that the first Favour he receiv'd from her, was a Piece of an old Scarlet Petticoat for a Stomacher; which since the Day of his Marriage, he has, out of a piece of Gallantry, converted into a Night-Cap, and wears it still with much Solemnity on his Anniversary Wedding-Night.
That I have seen, with the Ceremony thereunto belonging—For on that Night he creeps in at the Bed's Feet like a gull'd Bassa that has marry'd a Relation of the
Grand Signior
's, and that Night he
his Arms at Liberty. Did not she tell you at what Distance she keeps
. He
at some certain times, that is I suppose when she apprehends being with Child, he never has the Privilege of using the Familiarity of a Husband with his Wife. He was once given to scrambling with his Hands and sprawling in his Sleep; and ever since she has him swaddled up in Blankets, and his Hands and Feet swath'd down, and so put to Bed; and there he lies with a great Beard, like a
Russian
Bear upon a drift of Snow. You are very great with him, I wonder he never told you his Grievances, he will I warrant you.
Excessively foolish—But that which gives me most Hopes of her, is her telling me of the many Temptations she has resisted.
Nay, then you have her; for a Woman's bragging to a Man that she has overcome Temptations, is an Argument that they were weakly offer'd, and a Challenge to him to engage her more irresistably. 'Tis only an inhancing the Price of the Commodity, by telling you how many Customers have underbid her.
Nay, I don't despair—But still she has a grudging to you—I talk'd to her t'other Night at my Lord
Froth
's Masquerade, when I'm satisfied she knew me, and I had no reason to complain of my Reception; but I find Women are not the same bare-faced and in Masks,—and a Vizor disguises their Inclinations as much as their Faces.
'Tis a Mistake, for Women may most properly be said to be unmask'd when they wear Vizors; for that secures them from Blushing, and being out of Countenance, and next to being in the Dark, or alone, they are most truly themselves in a Vizor Mask. Here they come, I'll leave you. Ply her close, and by and by clap a
Billet doux
into her Hand: For a Woman never thinks a Man truly in Love with her, 'till he has been Fool enough to think of her out of her Sight, and to lose so much time as to write to her.
[Exit.
Enter Sir
Paul
and Lady
Plyant.
Shan't we disturb your Meditation, Mr.
Careless:
You wou'd be private?
You bring that along with you, Sir
Paul,
that shall be always welcome to my Privacy.
O, sweet Sir, you load your humble Servants, both me and my Wife, with continual Favours.
Sir
Paul,
what a Phrase was there? You will be making Answers, and taking that upon you, which ought to lie upon me: That you should have so little Breeding to think Mr.
Careless
did not apply himself to me. Pray what have you about you to entertain any Bodies Privacy? I swear and declare in the Face of the World I'm ready to blush for your Ignorance.
I acquiesce, my Lady; but don't Snub so loud.
[Aside to her.
Mr.
Careless,
If a Person that is wholly illiterate might be supposed to be capable of being qualify'd to make a suitable Return to those Obligations which you are pleased to confer upon one that is wholly incapable of being qualify'd in all those Circumstances, I'm sure I shou'd rather attempt it than any thing in the World,
[Courtesies.]
for I'm sure there's nothing in the World that I would rather.
[Courtesies]
But I know Mr.
Careless
is so great a Critick and so fine a Gentleman, that it is impossible for me—
O Heav'ns! Madam, you confound me.
Gad's-bud, she's a fine Person—
O Lord! Sir, pardon me, we Women have not those Advantages: I know my own Imperfections—But at the same time you must give me leave to declare in the Face of the World that no Body is more sensible of Favours and Things; for with the Reserve of my Honour, I assure you, Mr.
Careless
I don't know any thing in the World I would refuse to a Person so meritorious—You'll Pardon my want of Expression.—
O your Ladyship is abounding in all Excellence, particularly that of Phrase.
You are so Obliging, Sir.
Your Ladyship is so Charming.
So, now, now; now, my Lady.
So well bred.
So surprizing.
So well drest, so boon Mein, so eloquent, so unaffected, so easie, so free, so particular, so agreeable—
Ay, so, so, there.
O Lord, I beseech you, Madam, don't—
So gay, so graceful, so good Teeth, so fine Shape, so fine Limbs, so fine Linnen, and I don't doubt but you have a very good Skin, Sir,
For, Heav'ns sake, Madam—I'm quite out of Countenance.
And my Lady
s quite out of Breath; you should hear—Gad's-bud, you may talk of my Lady
Froth.
O fie, fie, not to be named of a Day—My Lady
Froth
is very well in her Accomplishments—But it is when my Lady
Plyant
is not thought of—If that can ever be,
O you overcome me—That is so excessive
Nay, I swear and vow that was pretty.
O Sir
Paul,
you are the happiest Man alive. Such a Lady! that is the Envy of her Sex, and the Admiration of ours.
Your humble Servant, I am I thank Heav'n in a fine way of living, as I may say, peacefully and happily, and I think need not envy any of my Neighbours, blessed be Providence—Ay, truly, Mr.
Careless,
my Lady is a great Blessing, a fine, discreet, well-spoken Woman as you shall see—If it becomes me to say so; and we live very comfortably together; she is a little hasty sometimes, and so am I; but mine's soon over, and then I'm so sorry—O, Mr.
Careless,
if it were not for one thing—
Enter Boy with a Letter, carries it to Sir
Paul.
How often have you been told of that, you Jackanapes?
Gad so, gad's-bud—
Tim.
carry it to my Lady, you should have carry'd it to my Lady first.
'Tis directed to your Worship.
Well, well, my Lady reads all Letters first—Child, do so no more; d'ye hear
Tim.
No, and please you.
[Carries the Letter to my Lady and
Exit.
A Humour of my Wife's, you know Women have little Fancies—But as I was telling you, Mr.
Careless,
if it were not for one thing, I should think my self the happiest Man in the World; indeed that touches me near, very near.
What can that be, Sir
Paul?
Why, I have, I thank Heav'n, a very plentiful Fortune, a good Estate in the Country, some Houses in Town, and some Mony, a pretty tolerable personal Estate; and it is a great Grief to me, indeed is is, Mr.
Careless,
that I have not a Son to Inherit this—'Tis true, I have a Daughter, and a fine Dutitiful Child she is, though I say it, blessed be Providence I may say; for indeed, Mr.
Careless,
I am mightily beholding to Providence—A poor unworthy Sinner—But if I had a Son, ah, that's my Affliction, and my only Affliction; indeed I cannot refrain Tears when it comes to my Mind
[Cries.
Why, methinks th
my Lady's a fine likely Woman—
Oh
a fine likely Woman as you shall see in a Summer's Day—Indeed she is, Mr.
Careless,
in all Respects.
And I should not have taken you to have been so old—
Alas, that's not it, Mr.
Careless;
ah! that's not it; no, no, you shoot wide of the Mark a Mile; indeed you do, that's not it, Mr.
Careless;
no, no, that's not it.
No, what can be the Matter then?
You'll scarcely believe me, when I shall tell you my Lady is so Nice—It's very strange, but it's true: Too true—she's so very Nice, that I don't believe she would touch a Man for the World—At least not above once a Year; I'm sure I have found it so; and alas, what's once a Year to an old Man, who would do good in his Generation? Indeed it's true, Mr.
Careless,
it breaks my Heart—I am her Husband, as I may say, though far unworthy of that Honour, yet I am her Husband; but alas-a-day, I have no more Familiarity with her Person—as to that Matter—than with my own Mother—no indeed.
Alas-a-day, this is a lamentable Story; my Lady must be told on't; she must i'faith, Sir
Paul;
'tis an Injury to the World.
Ah! would to Heav'n you would, Mr.
Careless;
you are mightily in her Favour.
I warrant you, what we must have a Son some way or other.
Indeed, I should be mightily bound to you, if you could bring it about, Mr.
Careless.
Here, Sir
Paul,
it's from your Steward, here's a Return of 600 Pounds; you may take Fifty of it for your next half Year.
Gives him the Letter.
Enter Lord
Froth, Cynthia.
How does my Girl? come hither to thy Father, poor Lamb, thou'rt Melancholy.
Heav'n, Sir
Paul,
you amaze me, of all things in the World—You are never pleas'd but when we are all upon the broad Grin; all Laugh and no Company; ah, then 'tis such a Sight to see some Teeth—Sure you're a great Admirer of my Lady
Whifler,
Mr.
Sneer,
and Sir
Laurence Loud,
and that Gang.
I vow and swear she's a very merry Woman, but, I think she laughs a little too much.
Merry! O Lord, wh
Woman of Quality—You have
Day, Madam?
Yes my Lord—I must
O most ridiculous, a perpetual Consort of laughing without any Harmony; for sure, my Lord, to laugh out of Time, is as disagreable as to sing out of Time or out of Tune.
Hee, hee, hee, right; and then, my Lady
Whifler
is so ready—she always comes in three Bars too soon—And then, what do they laugh at? For you know laughing without a Jest is as impertinent; hee! as, as—
As Dancing without a Fiddle.
Just 'ifaith, that was at my Tongue's end.
But that cannot be properly said of them, for I think they are all in good Nature with the World, and only Laugh at one another; and you must allow they have all Jests in their Persons, though they have none in their Conversation.
True, as I'm a Person of Honour—For Heav'ns sake let us sacrisice 'em to Mirth a little.
Enter
Boy
and whispers Sir
Paul.
'Gads so—Wife, Wife, my Lady
Plyant,
I have a Word.
I'm busie, Sir
Paul,
I wonder at your Impertinence—
Sir
Paul,
harkee, I'm reasoning the Matter you know; Madam,—if your Ladyship please, we'll discourse of this in the next Room.
[Exit
Careless
and Lady
Plyant.
O ho, I wish you good Success, I wish you good Success. Boy, tell my Lady, when she has done, I would speak with her below.
[Exit Sir
Paul.
Enter Lady
Froth
and
Brisk.
Then you think that
Episode
between
Susan,
the Dairy-Maid, and our Coach-man is not amiss; you know, I may suppose the Dairy in Town, as well as in the Country.
Incomparable, let me perish—But then being an Heroick Poem, had not you better call him a
Charioteer? Charioteer
sounds great; besides your Ladyship's Coachman having a red Face, and you comparing him to the Sun—And you know the Sun is call'd
Heav'ns Charioteer.
Oh, infinitely better; I'm extreamly beholding to you for the Hint; stay, we'll read over those half a Score Lines again.
[Pulls out a Paper.]
Let me see here, you know what goes before, the Comparison, you know.
[Reads]
For as the Sun shines ev'ry Day,
So of our Coach-man I may say.
I'm afraid that Simile won't do in wet Weather—Because you say the Sun shines ev'ry Day
No, for the Sun is won't, but it will do for the Coachman, for you know there's most Occasion for a Coach in wet Weather.
Right, right, that saves all.
Then I don't say the Sun shines all the Day, but that he peeps now and then, yet he does shine all the Day too, you know, tho' we don't see him.
Right, but the Vulgar will never comprehend that.
Well, you shall here—Let me see.
[Reads]
For as the Sun shines ev'ry Day,
So, of our Coach-man I may say,
He shows his drunken fiery Face,
Just as the Sun does, more or less.
That's right, all's well, all's well.
[L.
F.
reads]
And when at Night his Labour's done,
Then too, like Heav'ns Charioteer, the Sun:
Ay,
Charioteer
does better.
Into the Dairy he descends,
And there his Whipping and his Driving ends;
There he's secure from Danger of a Bilk,
His Fare is paid him, and he sets in Milk.
For
Susan,
you know, is
Thetis,
and so—
Incomparable well and proper, Igad—But I have one Exception to make—Don't you think Bilk (I know its good Rhime) but don't you think Bilk and Fare too like a Hackney Coach-man?
I swear and vow I'm afraid so—And yet our
Jehu
was a Hackney Coach-man, when my Lord took him.
Was that he then, I'm answer'd, if
Jehu
was a Hackney Coach-man—You may put that in the marginal Notes tho', to prevent Criticism—Only mark it with a small Asterism, and say,—
Jehu
was formerly a Hackney Coach-man.
I will; you'd oblige me extremely to write Notes to the whole Poem.
With all my Heart and Soul, and proud of the vast Honour, let me perish.
Hee, hee, hee, my Dear, have you done—won't you join with us, we were laughing at my Lady
Whifler,
and Mr.
Sneer.
—Ay my Dear—Were you? Oh filthy Mr.
Sneer;
he's a nauseous Figure, a most fulsmick Fop, Foh—He spent Two Days together in going about
Covent-Garden
to suit the Lining of his Coach with his Complexion.
O silly! yet his Aunt is as fond of him, as if she had brought the Ape into the World her self.
Who, my Lady
Toothless;
O, she's a mortifying Spectacle; she's always chewing the Cud like an old
Yew.
Fie, Mr.
Brisk,
'tis
Eringo
's for her Cough.
I have seen her take 'em half chew'd out of her Mouth, to laugh, and then put 'em in again—Foh.
Foh.
Then she's always ready to laugh when
Sneer
offers to speak—And sits in Expectation of his no Jest, with her Gums bare, and her Mouth open—
Like an Oyster at low Ebb, I'gad—Ha, ha, ha.
(Aside.)
Well, I find there are no Fools so inconsiderable in themselves, but they can render other People contemptible in exposing their Infirmities.
Then that t'other great strapping Lady—I can't hit of her Name; the old fat Fool that Paints so exorbitantly.
I know whom you mean—But Deuce take me I can't hit of her Name neither—Paints d'ye say? Why she lays it on with a Trowel—Then she has a great Beard that bristles through it, and makes her look as if she were plaister'd with Lime and Hair, let me perish.
Oh you made a Song upon her, Mr.
Brisk.
He? e'gad, so I did—My Lord can sing it.
O good my Lord let's hear it.
'Tis not a Song neither—It's a sort of an Epigram, or rather an Epigrammatick Sonnet; I don't know what to call it, but it's Satire.—Sing it my Lord.
SONG.
Ld.
F. Sings)
Ancient
Phillis,
has young Graces,
'Tis a strange thing, but a true one;
Shall I tell you how?
She her self makes her own Faces,
And each Morning wears a new one;
Where's the Wonder now?
Short, but there's Salt in't; my way of Writing I'gad.
Enter Footman.
How now?
Your Ladyship's Chair is come.
Is Nurse and the Child in it?
Yes, Madam.
O the dear Creature! Let's go see it.
I swear, my Dear, you'll spoil that Child, with sending it to and again so often, this is the Seventh Time the Chair has gone for her to Day.
O-law, I swear it's but the Sixth,—and I han't seen her these two Hours—The poor dear Creature—I swear, my Lord, you don't Love poor little
Sapho
—Come, my dear
Cynthia,
Mr.
Brisk,
we'll go see
Sapho,
tho' my Lord won't
I'll wait upon your Ladyship.
Pray, Madam, how old is Lady
Sapho?
Three Quarters, but I swear she has a World of Wit, and can sing a Tune already? My Lord, won't you go? Won't you? What not to see
Saph?
Pray, my Lord, come see little
Saph.
I knew you cou'd not stay.
[Exeunt.
Tis not so hard to counterfeit Joy in the depth of Affliction, as to dissemble Mirth in Company of Fools—Why should I call 'em Fools? The World thinks better of 'em; for these have Quality and Education, Wit and fine Conversation, are receiv'd and admir'd by the World—If not, they like and admire themselves—And why is not that true Wisdom, for 'tis Happiness: And for ought I know, we have misapply'd the Name all this while, and mistaken the Thing: Since
If Happiness in Self-content is plac'd,
The Wise are Wretched, and Fools only Bless'd.
[Exit.
The End of the Third Act.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter
Mellefont
and
Cynthia.
I Heard him loud as I came by the Closet-Door, and my Lady with him, but she seem'd to moderate his Passion.
Ay, Hell thank her, as gentle Breezes moderate a Fire; but I shall counter-work her Spells, and ride the Witch in her own Bridle.
It's impossible, she'll cast beyond you still—I'll lay my Life it will never be a Match.
What?
Between you and me.
Why so?
My Mind gives me it won't—because we are both willing; we each of us strive to reach the Gole, and hinder one another in the Race; I swear it never do's well when the Parties are so agreed—For when People walk Hand in Hand, there's neither overtaking nor meeting: We Hunt in Couples where we both pursue the same Game, but forget one another; and 'tis because we are so near that we don't think of coming together.
Hum, 'gad I believe there's something in't;—Marriage is the Game that we Hunt, and while we think that we only have it in View, I don't see but we have it in our Power,
Within reach; for Example, give me your Hand; why have you look'd through the wrong End of the Perspective all this while; for nothing has been between us but our Fears.
I don't know why we should not steal out of the House this Moment and Marry one another, without Consideration or the Fear of Repentance. Pox o'Fortune, Portion; Settlements and Jointures.
Ay, ay, what have we to do with 'em; you know we Marry for Love.
Love, Love, down-right very Villainous Love.
And he that can't live upon Love, deserves to die in a Ditch.—Here then, I give you my Promise, in spight of Duty, any Temptation of Wealth, your Inconstancy, or my own Inclination to change—
To run most wilfully and unreasonably away with me this Moment, and be Married.
Hold—Never to Marry any Body else.
That's but a kind of Negative Consent.—Why, you won't baulk the Frolick?
If you had not been so assured of your own Conduct I would not—But 'tis but reasonable that since I consent to like a Man without the vile Consideration of Mony, he should give me a very evident Demonstration of his Wit: Therefore let me see you undermine my Lady
Touchwood,
as you boasted, and force her to give her Consent, and then—
I'll do't.
And I'll do't.
This very next ensuing Hour of Eight a Clock, is the last Minute of her Reign, unless the Devil assist her in
propria persona.
Well, if the Devil should assist her, and your Plot miscarry.—
Ay, what am I to trust to then?
Why if you give me very clear demonstration that it was the Devil, I'll allow for irresistable odds. But if I find it to be only Chance, or Destiny, or unlucky Stars, or any thing but the very Devil, I'm inexorable: Only still I'll keep my Word, and live a Maid for your sake.
And you won't die one, for your own, so still there's Hope.
Here's my Mother-in-Law, and your Friend
Careless,
I would not have 'em see us together yet.
[Exeunt.
Enter
Careless
and Lady
Plyant.
I swear, Mr.
Careless,
you are very alluring—And so many fine Things, and nothing is so moving to me as a fine Thing. Well, I must do you this Justice, and declare in the Face of the World, never any Body gain'd so far upon me as your self; with Blushes I must own it, you have shaken, as I may say, the very Foundation of my Honour—Well, sure if I escape your Importunities, I shall value my self as long as I live, I swear.
And Despise me.
(Sighing.)
The last of any Man in the World, by my Purity; now you make me swear—O Gratitude forbid, that I should ever be wanting in a respectful Acknowledgment of an intire Resignation of all my best Wishes, for the Person and Parts of so accomplish'd a Person, whose Merit challenges much more, I'm sure, than my illiterate Praises can description;
(In a whining Tone.)
Ah Heav'ns, Madam, you ruin me with Kindness; your Charming Tongue pursues the Victory of your Eyes, while at your Feet your poor Adorer dies.
Ah! Very fine.
(Still whining.)
Ah why are you so Fair, so bewitching Fair? O let me grow to the Ground here, and feast upon that Hand; O let me press it to my Heart, my trembling Heart, the nimble Movement shall instruct your Pulse, and teach it to allarm Desire.
[Zoons I'm almost at the end of my Cant, if she does not yield quickly.
(Aside.)
O that's so passionate and fine, I cannot hear it—I am not safe if I stay, and must leave you.
And must you leave me! Rather let me languish out a Wretched Life, and breath my Soul beneath your Feet.
[I must say the same Thing over again, and can't help it.
(Aside.)
I swear I am ready to languish too—O my Honour! Whither is it going? I protest you have given me the Palpitation of the Heart.
Can you be so cruel.—
O rise I beseech you, say no more 'till you rise—Why did you kneel so long? I swear I was so transported, I did not see it.—Well, to shew you how far you have gain'd upon me; I assure you if Sir
Paul
should die, of all Mankind there's none I'd sooner make my second Choice.
O Heav'n! I can't out live this Night without your Favour—I feel my Spirits faint, a general Dampness overspreads my Face, a cold deadly Dew already vents through all my Pores, and will to Morrow wash me for ever from your Sight, and drown me in my Tomb.
O you have Conquer'd, sweet, melting, moving Sir, you have Conquer'd—What Heart of Marble can refrain to Weep, and yield to such sad Sayings.—
[Cries.
I thank Heav'n, they are the saddest that I ever said—Oh!
[I shall never contain Laughter.
[Aside.
Oh, I yield my self all up to your uncontroulable Embraces—Say, thou dear dying Man, when, where, and how.—Ah, there's Sir
Paul.
Enter Sir
Paul
and
Cynthia.
'Slife, yonder's Sir
Paul,
but if he were not come, I'm so transported I cannot speak—This Note will inform you.
(Gives her a Note.)
[Exit.
Thou art my tender Lambkin, and shalt do what thou wilt—But endeavour to forget this
Mellefont.
I would obey you to my Power, Sir; but if I have not him, I have sworn never to Marry.
Never to Marry! Heav'ns forbid; must I neither have Sons nor Grandsons? must the Family of the
Plyants
be utterly extinct for want of Issue Male. Oh Impiety! But did you swear, did that sweet Creature swear! ha? How durst you swear without my Consent, ah? Gads-bud, who am I?
Pray don't be angry, Sir, when I swore, I had your Consent, and therefore I swore.
Why then the revoking my Consent does annul, or make of none effect your Oath: So you may unswear it again
Ay, but my Conscience never will.
Gads-bud no matter for that, Conscience and Law never go together; you must not expect that.
Ay, but Sir
Paul,
I conceive if she has sworn, d'ye mark me, if she has once sworn; it is most unchristian, inhuman, and obscene that she shou'd break it.—I'll make up the Match again, because Mr.
Careless
said it would oblige him.
[Aside.]
Does your Ladyship conceive so—Why I was of that Opinion once too—Nay if your Ladyship conceives so, I'm of that Opinion again; but I can neither find my Lord and my Lady to know what they intend.
I'm satisfied that my Cousin
Mellefont
has been much wrong'd.
(Aside.)
I'm amazed to find her of our side, for I'm sure she lov'd him.
I know my Lady
Touchwood
has no Kindness for him; and besides I have been inform'd by Mr.
Careless,
that
Mellefont
had never any thing more than a profound Respect—That he has own'd himself to be my Admirer 'tis true, but he was never so presumptuous to entertain any dishonourable Notions of Things; so that if this be made plain—I don't see how my Daughter can in Conscience, or Honour, or any thing in the World—
Indeed if this be made plain, as my Lady your Mother says, Child—
Plain! I was inform'd of it by Mr.
Careless
—And I assure you Mr.
Careless
is a Person—that has a most extraordinary Respect and Honour for you, Sir
Paul.
(Aside.)
And for your Ladyship too, I believe, or else you had not chang'd Sides so soon; now I begin to find it.
I am much obliged to Mr.
Careless
really, he is a Person that I have a great Value for, not only for that, but because he has a great Veneration for your Ladyship.
O las, no indeed, Sir
Paul,
'tis upon your Account.
No I protest and vow, I have no Title to his Esteem, but in having the Honour to appertain in some measure to your Ladyship, that's all.
O law now, I swear and declare, it shan't be so, you're too modest, Sir
Paul.
It becomes me, when there is any Comparison made, between—
O fy, fy, Sir
Paul,
you'll put me out of Countenance—Your very obedient and affectionate Wife; that's all—And highly honoured in that Title.
Gads-bud I am transported! Give me leave to kiss your Ladyship's Hand.
That my poor Father should be so very silly!
[Aside.
My Lip indeed, Sir
Paul,
I swear you shall.
[He kisses her, and bows very low.
I humbly thank your Ladyship—I don't know whether I fly on Ground, or walk in Air—Gads-bud, she was never thus before—Well, I must own my self the most beholden to Mr.
Careless
—As sure as can be this is all his doing,—something that he has said; well, 'tis a rare thing to have an Ingenious Friend. Well, your Ladyship is of Opinion that the Match may go forward.
By all means—Mr.
Careless
has satisfy'd me of the Matter.
Well, why then Lamb you may keep your Oath, but have a care of making rash Vows; come hither to me, and kiss
Papa.
I swear and declare, I am in such a twitter to read Mr.
Careless
his Letter, that I can't forbear any longer—But though I may read all Letters first by Prerogative, yet I'll be sure to be unsuspected this time.—Sir
Paul.
Did your Ladyship call?
Nay, not to interrupt you my Dear—Only lend me your Letter, which you had from your Steward to Day: I would look upon the Account again; and may be increase your Allowance.
There it is, Madam; Do you want a Pen and Ink?
[Bows and gives the Letter.
No, no, nothing else, I thank you, Sir
Paul.
—So now I can read my own Letter under the cover of his.
[Aside.
He? And wilt thou bring a Grandson at nine Months end—He? A brave chopping Boy.—I'll settle a Thousand Pound a Year upon the Rogue as soon as ever he looks me in the Face, I will Gads-bud. I'm overjoy'd to think I have any of my Family that will bring Children into the World. For I would fain have some Resemblance of my self in my Posterity, he
Thy?
Can't you contrive that affair Girl? Do gads-bud, think on thy old Father; Heh? Make the young Rogue as like as you can.
I'm glad to see you so merry, Sir.
Merry, Gads-bud I'm serious, I'll give thee 500
l.
for every Inch of him that resembles me; ah this Eye, this Left Eye! A Thousand Pound for this Left Eye. This has done Execution in its time Girl; why thou hast my Leer Hussey, just thy Father's Leer.—Let it be transmitted to the young Rogue by the help of Imagination; why 'tis the Mark of our Family
Thy;
our House is distinguish'd by a languishing Eye, as the House of
Austria
is by a thick Lip.—Ah! when I was of your Age Hussey, I would have held fifty to one, I could have drawn my own Picture—Gads-bud I could have done—not so much as you neither,—but—nay, don't blush—
I don't blush, Sir, for I vow I don't understand.—
Pshaw, Pshaw, you fib you Baggage, you do understand, and you shall understand; come don't be so nice, Gads-bud don't learn after your Mother-in-Law my Lady here: Marry Heaven forbid that you should follow her Example, that would spoil all indeed. Bless us, if you should take a Vagarie and make a rash Resolution on your Wedding Night, to die a Maid, as she did; all were ruin'd, all my Hopes lost—My Heart would break, and my Estate would be left to the wide World, he? I hope you are a better Christian than to think of living a Nun; he? Answer me?
I'm all Obedience, Sir, to your Commands.
[Having read the Letter)
O dear Mr.
Careless,
I swear he writes charmingly, and he talks charmingly, and he looks charmingly, and he has charm'd me, as much as I have charm'd him; and so I'll tell him in the Wardrobe when 'tis Dark. O Crimine! I hope Sir
Paul
has not seen both Letters.
[Puts the wrong Letter hastily up, and gives him her own.
Sir
Paul,
here's your Letter, to Morrow Morning I'll settle the Accounts to your Advantage.
Enter Brisk.
Sir
Paul,
Gads-bud you're an uncivil Person, let me tell you, and all that; and I did not think it had been in you.
O Law, what's the matter now? I hope you are not angry, Mr.
Brisk.
Deuce take me I believe you intend to Marry your Daughter your self; you're always brooding over her like an old Hen, as if she were not well hatch'd, I'gad, he?
Good strange! Mr.
Brisk
is such a Merry Facetious Person, he, he, he. No, no, I have done with her, I have done with her now.
The Fiddlers have stay'd this Hour in the Hall, and my Lord
Froth
wants a Partner, we can never begin without her.
Go, go Child, go, get you gone and Dance and be Merry, I'll come and look at you by and by.—Where's my Son
Mellefont?
[Exit Cynt.
I'll send him to them, I know where he is.—
[Exit.
Sir
Paul,
will you send
Careless
into the Hall if you meet him.
I will, I will, I'll go and look for him on purpose.
[Exit.
So now they are all gone, and I have an Opportunity to practise.—Ah! My dear Lady
Froth!
She's a most engaging Creature, if she were not so fond of that damn'd coxcombly Lord of hers; and yet I am forced to allow him Wit too, to keep in with him—No matter, she's a Woman of Parts, and I'gad Parts will carry her. She said she would follow me into the Gallery—Now to make my Approaches—Hem hem! Ah Ma-
(Bows.)
dam!—Pox on't, why should I disparage my Parts by thinking what to say? None but dull Rogues
think;
witty Men, like rich Fellows, are always ready for all Expences; while your Blockheads, like poor needy Scoundrels, are forced to examine their Stock, and forecast the Charges of the Day. Here she comes, I'll seem not to see her, and try to win her with a new airy Invention of my own, hem!
Enter Lady
Froth.
Brisk
Sings,
I'm sick with Love,
ha, ha, ha,
prithee come cure walking about. me. I'm sick with,
&c.
O ye Powers! O my Lady
Froth,
my Lady
Froth!
My Lady
Froth!
Heigho! Break Heart; God's I thank you.
[Stands musing with his Arms a-cross.
O Heav'ns, Mr.
Brisk!
What's the matter?
My Lady
Froth!
Your Ladyship's most humble Servant;—The matter, Madam? Nothing, Madam, nothing at all I'gad. I was fallen into the most agreeable Amusement in the whole Province of Contemplation: That's all—
(I'll seem to conceal my Passion, and that will look like Respect.)
[Aside.
Bless me, why did you call out upon me so loud?—
O Lord I Madam! I beseech your Ladyship—when?
Just now as I came in, bless me, why don't you know it?
Not I, let me perish—But did I! Strange! I confess your Ladyship was in my Thoughts; and I was in a sort of Dream that did in a manner represent a very pleasing Object to my Imagination, but—but did I indeed?—To see how Love and Murder will out. But did I really name my Lady
Froth?
Three times aloud, as I love Letters—But did you talk of Love? O
Parnassus!
Who would have thought Mr.
Brisk
could have been in Love, ha, ha, ha. O Heav'ns I thought you cou'd have no Mistress but the Nine Muses.
No more I have I'gad, for I adore 'em all in your Ladyship—Let me perish, I don't know whether to be splenatick, or Airy upon't; the Deuce take me if I can tell whether I am glad or sorry that your Ladyship has made the Discovery.
O be merry by all means—Prince
Volscius
in Love! Ha, ha, ha.
O barbarous, to turn me into Ridicule! Yet, ha, ha, ha. The Deuce take me, I can't help Laughing my self, ha, ha, ha; yet by Heav'ns I have a violent Passion for your Ladyship, seriously.
Seriously? Ha, ha, ha.
Seriously, ha, ha, ha. Gad I have, for all I laugh.
Ha, ha, ha! What d'ye think I laugh at? Ha, ha, ha.
Me I'gad, ha, ha.
No the Deuce take me if I don't Laugh at my self; for hang me if I have not a violent Passion for Mr.
Brisk,
ha, ha, ha.
Seriously?
Seriously, ha, ha, ha.
That's well enough; let me perish, ha, ha, ha. O Miraculous, what a happy Discovery. Ah my dear charming Lady
Froth!
Oh my adored Mr.
Brisk!
[Embrace.
Enter Lord
Froth.
The Company are all ready—How now!
Zoons, Madam, there's my Lord.
[Softly to her.
Take no notice—but observe me—Now cast off, and meet me at the lower end of the Room, and then join Hands again; I could teach my Lord this Dance purely, but I vow, Mr.
Brisk,
I can't tell how to come so near any other Man. Oh here's my Lord, now you shall see me do it with him.
[They pretend to practise part of a Country Dance.
—Oh I see there's no harm yet—But I don't like this Familiarity
[Aside.
—Shall you and I do our close Dance, to show Mr.
Brisk,
No, my Dear, do it with him.
I'll do it with him, my Lord, when you are out of the way.
That's good I'gad, that's good
Deuce take me I can
Any other time, my Dear, or we'll dance it below.
With all my Heart.
Come my Lord, I'll wait on you—My charming witty Angel!
[To her
We shall have whispering time enough, you know, since we are Partners.
[Exeunt.
Enter Lady
Plyant,
and
Careless.
O Mr.
Careless,
Mr.
Careless,
I'm ruin'd, I'm undone.
What's the matter, Madam?
O the unlucky'st Accident, I'm afraid I shan't live to tell it you.
Heav'n forbid! What is it?
I'm in such a Fright; the strangest Quandary and Premunire! I'm all over in a Universal Agitation, I dare swear every Circumstance of me trembles.—O your Letter, your Letter! By an unfortunate Mistake, I have given Sir
Paul
your Letter instead of his own.
That was unlucky.
O yonder he comes reading of it, for Heav'ns sake step in here and advise me quickly, before he sees.
[Exeunt.
Enter Sir
Paul
with the Letter.
—O Providence, what a Conspiracy have I discover'd—But let me see to make an end on't.—
(Reads)
Hum—
After Supper in the Wardrobe by the Gallery. If Sir
Paul
should surprize us, I have a Commission from him to treat with you about the very matter of Fact.
—Matter of Fact! Very pretty; it seems then I am conducing to my own Cuckoldom; why this is the very traiterous Position of taking up Arms by my Authority, against my Person! Well, let me see—
'Till then I languish in expectation of my Adored Charmer.
Dying
Ned. Careless.
Gads-bud, would that were matter of Fact too. Die and be Damn'd for a
Judas Maccabeus,
and
Iscariot
both. O Friendship! What art thou but a Name! Henceforward let no Man make a Friend that would not be Cuckold: For whomsoever he receives into his Bosom, will find the Way to his Bed, and there return his Caresses with Interest to his Wife. Have I for this been pinion'd Night after Night for three Years past? Have I been swath'd in Blankets 'till I have been even depriv'd of Motion, and render'd uncapable of using the common Benefits of Nature? Have I approach'd the Marriage Bed with Reverence as to a sacred Shrine, and deny'd my self the Enjoyment of lawful Domestick Pleasures to preserve its Purity, and must I now find it polluted by foreign Iniquity? O my Lady
Plyant,
you were chaste as Ice, but you are melted now, and false as Water.—But Providence has been constant to me in discovering this Conspiracy; still I am beholden to Providence, if it were not for Providence, sure poor Sir
Paul
thy Heart would break.
Enter Lady
Plyant.
So, Sir, I see you have read the Letter,—Well now, Sir
Paul,
what do you think of your Friend
Careless?
Has he been Treacherous, or did you give his Insolence a License to make Trial of your Wife's suspected Virtue? D'ye see here?
[Snatches the Letter as in Anger.
Look, read it? Gad's my Life if I thought it were so, I would this Moment renounce all Communication with you. Ungrateful Monster! He? Is it so? Ay, I see it, a Plot upon my Honour; your guilty Cheeks confess it: Oh where shall wrong'd Virtue fly for Reparation! I'll be divorced this Instant.
Gads-bud, what shall I say? This is the strangest Surprize! Why I don't know any thing at all, nor I don't know whether there be any thing at all in the World, or no,
I thought I should try you, false Man. I that never dissembled in my Life: Yet to make trial of you, pretended to like that Monster of Iniquity,
Careless,
and found out that Contrivance to let you see this Letter; which now I find was of your own inditing—I do Heathen, I do; see my Face no more; there has hardly been Consummation between us, and I'll be divorced presently.
O strange, what will become of me!—I'm so amaz'd, and so overjoy'd, so afraid, and so sorry.—But did you give me this Letter on purpose, he? Did you?
Did I? Do you doubt me, Turk, Sarazen? I have a Cousin that's a Proctor in the Commons, I'll go to him instantly.—
Hold, stay, I beseech your Ladyship—I'm so overjoy'd, stay, I'll confess all.
What will you confess, Jew?
Why now as I hope to be sav'd, I had no Hand in this Letter—Nay hear me, I beseech your Ladyship: The Devil take me now if he did not go beyond my Commission—If I desired him to do any more than speak a good Word only just for me; Gads-bud only for poor Sir
Paul,
I'm an Anabaptist, or a Jew, or what you please to call me.
Why is not here matter of Fact?
Ay, but by your own Virtue and Continency that matter of Fact is all his own doing.—I confess I had a great Desire to have some Honours conferr'd upon me, which lye all in your Ladyship's Breast, and he being a well-spoken Man, I desired him to intercede for me.—
Did you so, Presumption! Well, remember for this, your right Hand shall be swath'd down again to Night—And I thought to have always allow'd you that Liberty.
Nay but Madam, I shall offend again if you do not allow me that to reach—
Drink the less you Sot, and do't before you come to Bed.
[Exit.
Enter
Careless.
Sir
Paul,
I'm glad I've met with you, 'gad I have said all I could, but can't prevail—Then my Friendship to you has carried me a little farther in this Matter—
Indeed—Well Sir—I'll dissemble with him a little.
[Aside.
Why faith I have in my Time known honest Gentlemen abused by a pretended Coyness in their Wives, and I had a mind to try my Lady's Virtue—And when I could not prevail for you, 'gad I pretended to be in Love my self—but all in vain, she would not hear a Word upon that Subject: Then I Writ a Letter to her; I don't know what Effects that will have, but I'll be sure to tell you when I do, tho' by this Light I believe her Virtue is impregnable.
O Providence! Providence! What Discoveries are here made? Why, this is better and more Miraculous than the rest.
What do you mean?
I can't tell you, I'm so overjoy'd; come along with me to my Lady, I can't contain my self; come my dear Friend.
[Exeunt.
So, so, so, this Difficulty's over.
[Aside.
Enter
Mellefont
and
Maskwell
severally.
Maskwell!
I have been looking for you—'tis within a Quarter of Eight.
My Lady is just gone into my Lord's Closet, you had best steal into her Chamber before she comes, and lye concealed there, otherwise she may Lock the Door when we are together, and you not easily get in to surprize us.
He? You say true.
You had best make haste, for she's gone to make some
I go this Moment: Now Fortune I defie thee.
[Exit.
I confess you may be allow'd to be secure in your own Opinion; the Appearance is very fair, but I have an After Game to play that shall turn the Tables, and here comes the Man that I must manage.
Enter Lord
Touchwood.
Maskwell,
you are the Man I wish'd to meet.
I am happy to be in the way of your Lordship's Commands.
I have always found you prudent and careful in any thing that has concern'd me or my Family.
I were a Villain else—I am bound by Duty and Gratitude, and my own Inclination, to be ever your Lordship's Servant.
Enough—You are my Friend; I know it: Yet there has been a thing in your Knowledge, which has concern'd me nearly, that you have conceal'd from me.
My Lord!
Nay, I excuse your Friendship to my unnatural Nephew thus far—But I know you have been Privy to his impious Designs upon my Wife. This Ev'ning she has told me all: Her good Nature conceal'd it as long as was possible; but he perseveres so in Villany, that she has told me even you were weary of dissuading him, though you have once actually hindered him from forcing her.
I am sorry, my Lord, I can't make you an Answer; this is an Occasion in which I would not willingly be so silent.
I know you would excuse him—And I know as well that you can't.
Indeed I was in hopes 'thad been a youthful Heat that might have soon boil'd over; but—
Say on.
I have nothing more to say, my Lord—But to express my Concern; for I think his Frenzy increases daily.
How! Give me but Proof of it, Ocular Proof, that I may justifie my Dealing with him to the World, and share my Fortunes.
O my Lord! consider that is hard: Besides, time may work upon him: Then, for me to do it! I have profess'd an everlasting Friendship to him.
He is your Friend, and what am I?
I am answered.
Fear not his Displeasure; I will put you out of his, and Fortune's Power, and for that thou art scrupulously honest, I will secure thy Fidelity to him, and give my Honour never to own any Discovery that you shall make me. Can you give me a demonstrative Proof? Speak.
I wish I could not—To be plain, my Lord, I intended this Ev'ning to have try'd all Arguments to dissuade him from a Design, which I suspect; and if I had not succeeded, to have informed your Lordship of what I knew.
I thank you. What is the Villain's Purpose?
He has own'd nothing to me of late, and what I mean now, is only a bare Suspicion of my own. If your Lordship will meet me a Quarter of an Hour hence there, in that Lobby by my Lady's Bed-Chamber, I shall be able to tell you more.
I will.
My Duty to your Lordship, makes me do a severe Piece of Justice.—
I will be secret, and reward your Honesty beyond your Hopes.
[Exeunt, severally.
SCENE opening shews Lady
Touchwood
's Chamber.
Mellefont
Solus.
Pray Heav'n my Aunt keep touch with her Assignation.—Oh that her Lord were but sweating behind this Hanging, with the Expectation of what I shall see—Hist, she comes—Little does she think what a Mine is just ready to spring under her Feet. But to my Post.
[Goes behind the Hangings.
Enter Lady
Touchwood.
'Tis Eight a Clock: Methinks I should have found him here. Who does not prevent the Hour of Love, outstays the Time; for to be dully punctual, is too slow.—I was accusing you of Neglect.
Enter
Maskwell.
I confess you do reproach me when I see you here before me; but 'tis fit I should be still behind hand, still to be more and more indebted to your Goodness.
You can excuse a Fault too well, not to have been to blame—A ready Answer shews you were prepar'd.
Guilt is ever at a loss, and Confusion waits upon it; when Innocence and bold Truth are always ready for Expression—
Not in Love; Words are the weak Support of cold Indifference; Love has no Language to be heard.
Excess of Joy has made me stupid! Thus may my Lips be ever clos'd.
(Kisses her.)
And thus—Oh who would not lose his Speech, upon Condition to have Joys above it?
Hold, let me lock the Door first.
[Goes to the Door.
(Aside.)
That I believ'd; 'twas well I left the private Passage open.
So, that's safe.
And so may all your Pleasures be, and secret as this Kiss—
And may all Treachery be thus discover'd.
[Leaps out.
Ah!
[Shrieks.
Villain!
[Offers to draw.
Nay then, there's but one Way.
[Runs out.
Say you so, were you provided for an Escape? Hold, Madam, you have no more Holes to your Burrough, I'll stand between you and this Sally-Port.
Thunder strike thee dead for this Deceit, immediate Lightning blast thee, me and the whole World—Oh! I could rack my self, play the Vulture to my own Heart, and gnaw it piece-meal, for not boding to me this Misfortune.
Be Patient.—
Be Damn'd.
Consider I have you on the Hook; you will but flounder your self a weary, and be nevertheless my Prisoner.
I'll hold my Breath and die, but I'll be free.
O Madam, have a care of dying unprepar'd, I doubt you have some unrepented Sins that may hang heavy, and retard your Flight.
O! what shall I do? say? Whither shall I turn? Has Hell no Remedy?
None, Hell has serv'd you ev'n as Heav'n has done, left you to your self.—You're in a kind of
Erasmus
Paradice; yet if you please you may make it a Purgatory; and with a little Penance and my Absolution all this may turn to good Account.
(Aside.)
Hold in my Passion, and fall, fall a little thou swelling Heart; let me have some intermission of this Rage, and one Minute's Coolness to dissemble.
[She weeps.
You have been to blame.—I like those Tears, and hope they are of the purest Kind—Penitential Tears.
O the Scene was shifted quick before me—I had not time to think—I was surprised to see a Monster in the Glass, and now I find it is my self; Can you have Mercy to forgive the Faults I have imagined, but never put in practice—Oconsider, consider how fatal you have been to me, you have already kill'd the Quiet of this Life. The Love of you, was the first wand'ring Fire that e'er miss-led my Steps, and while I had only that in View, I was betray'd into unthought of Ways of Ruin.
May I believe this true?
O be not cruelly incredulous—How can you doubt these streaming Eyes? Keep the severest Eye o'er all my future Conduct; and if I once relapse, let me not hope Forgiveness, 'twill ever be in your Power to ruin me—My Lord shall sign to your Desires; I will my self create your Happiness, and
Cynthia
shall be this Night your Bride—Do but conceal my Failings, and forgive.
Upon such Terms I will be ever yours in ev'ry honest Way.
Enter Lord
Touchwood, Maskwell
softly behind him.
I have kept my Word, he's here, but I must not be seen.
[Exit.
Hell and Amazement, she's in Tears.
(Kneeling)
Eternal Blessings thank you—Ha! My Lord list'ning! O Fortune has o'erpaid me all, all! all's my own!
[Aside.]
Nay, I beseech you rise.
(Aloud.)
Never, never! I'll grow to the Ground, be buried quick beneath it, e'er I'll be consenting to so damn'd a Sin as Incest! unnatural Incest!
Ha!
O cruel Man, will you not let me go—I'll forgive all that's past—O Heav'n, you will not Ravish me!
Damnation!
Monster, Dog! your Life shall answer this—
[Draws, and runs at
Mel.
is held by Lady
Touch.
O Heav'ns my Lord! Hold, hold, for Heav'ns sake.
Confusion, my Uncle! O the damn'd Sorceress.
Moderate your Rage, good my Lord! He's mad, alas he's mad—Indeed he is my Lord, and knows not what he does—See how wild he looks.
By Heav'n 'twere senselessss not to be mad, and see such Witchcraft.
My Lord, you hear him, he talks idly.
Hence from my Sight, thou living Infamy to my Name; when next I see that Face, I'll write Villain in't with my Sword's Point.
Now, by my Soul, I will not go 'till I have made known my Wrongs—Nay, 'till I have made known yours, which (if possible) are greater—though she has all the Host of Hell her Servants; though she can wear more Shapes in shining Day, then Fear shews Cowards in the Dark—
Alas he raves! Talks very Poetry! For Heav'ns sake away my Lord, he'll either tempt you to Extravagance, or commit some himself.
Death and Furies, will you not hear me—Why by Heav'n she laughs, grins, points to your Back; she forks out Cuckoldom with her Fingers, and you're running Horn-mad after your Fortune.
[As she is going she turns back and smiles at him.
I fear he's mad indeed—Let's send
Maskwell
to him.
Send him to her.
Come, come, good my Lord, my Heart akes so, I shall faint if I stay.
[Exeunt.
O I could curse my Stars, Fate, and Chance; all Causes and Accidents of Fortune in this Life! But to what purpose? Yet, 'sdeath, for a Man to have the Fruit of all his Industry grow full and ripe, ready to drop into his Mouth, and just when he holds out his Hand to gather it, to have a sudden Whirlwind come, tear up Tree and all, and bear away the very Root and Foundation of his Hopes; What Temper can contain? They talk of sending
Maskwell
to me; I never had more need of him—But what can he do? Imagination cannot form a fairer and more plausible Design than this of his which has miscarried.—O my precious Aunt, I shall never thrive without I deal with the Devil, or another Woman.
Women like Flames have a destroving Pow'r,
Ne'er to be quench'd, 'till they themselves devour.
SCENE shuts.
[Exit.
End of the Fourth Act.
ACT V. SCENE I.
Enter Lady
Touchwood
and
Maskwell.
WAst not Lucky?
Lucky! Fortune is your own, and 'tis her Interest so to be; By Heav'n I believe you can controul her Pow'r, and she fears it; though Chance brought my Lord, 'twas your own Art that turn'd it to Advantage.
'Tis true it might have been my Ruin—But yonder's my Lord, I believe he's coming to find you, I'll not be seen.
[Exit.
So; I durst not own my introducing my Lord, though it succeeded well for her, for she would have suspected a Design which I should have been puzzled to excuse. My Lord is thoughtful—I'll be so to; yet he shall know my Thoughts; or think he does—
Enter Lord
Touchwood.
What have I done?
Talking to himself!
'Twas honest—and shall I be rewarded for it? No, 'twas honest therefore I shan't;—Nay, rather therefore I ought not for it rewards it self.
Unequall'd Virtue!
[Aside.
But should it be known! then I have lost a Friend! He was an ill Man, and I have gain'd for half my self I lent him, and that I have recall'd; so I have served my self, and what is yet better, I have served a worthy Lord to whom I owe my self.
Excellent Man!
[Aside.
Yet I am wretched—O there is a Secret burns within this Breast, which should it once blaze sorth, would ruin all, consume my honest Character, and brand me with the name of Villam.
Ha!
Why do I love! Yet Heav'n and my waking Conscience are my Witnesses, I never gave one working Thought a vent; which might discover that I lov'd, nor ever must; no, let it prey upon my Heart; for I would rather die, than seem once, barely seem, dishonest:—O, should it once be known I love fair
Cynthia,
all this that I have done would look like Rival's Malice, false Friendship to my Lord, and base Self-interest. Let me perish first, and from this Hour avoid all Sight and Speech, and, if I can, all Thought of that pernicious Beauty. Ha! But what is my Distraction doing? I am wildly talking to my self, and some ill Chance might have directed malicious Ears this way.
[Seems to start, seeing my Lord.
Start not—let guilty and dishonest Souls start at the Revelation of their Thoughts, but be thou fix'd, as is thy Virtue.
I am confounded and beg your Lordship's Pardon for those free Discourses which I have had with my self.
Come, I beg your Pardon that I over-heard you, and yet it shall not need—Honest
Maskwell!
thy and my good Genius led me hither—Mine, in that I have discover'd so much manly Virtue; thine, in that thou shalt have due Reward of all thy Worth. Give me thy Hand—my Nephew is the alone remaining Branch of all our ancient Family; him I thus blow away, and constitute thee in his room to be my Heir—
Now Heav'n forbid—
No more—I have resolv'd—The Writings are ready drawn, and wanted nothing but to be sign'd, and have his Name inserted—Yours will fill the Blank as well—I will have no Reply—Let me command this time; for 'tis the last, in which I will assume Authority—hereafter, you shall rule where I have Power.
I humbly would petition—
Is't for your self?—
[
Mask.
pauses.]
I'll hear of nought for any body else.
Then Witness Heav'n for me, this Wealth and Honour was not of my seeking, nor would I build my Fortune on another's Ruin: I had but one Desire—
Thou shalt enjoy it—If all I'm worth in Wealth or Interest can purchase
Cynthia,
she is thine.—I'm sure Sir
Paul
's Consent will follow Fortune; I'll quickly show him which way that is going.
You oppress me with Bounty; my Gratitude is weak, and shrinks beneath the Weight, and cannot rise to thank you—What, enjoy my Love! Forgive the Transports of a Blessing so unexpected, so unhop'd for, so unthought of!
I will confirm it, and rejoice with thee.
[Exit.
This is prosp'rous indeed—Why let him find me out a Villain settled in Possession of a fair Estate, and full Fruition of my Love, I'll bear the Railings of a losing Gamester—But shou'd he find me out before! 'tis dangerous to delay—Let me think—shou'd my Lord proceed to treat openly of my Marriage with
Cynthia,
all must be discover'd, and
Mellefont
can be no longer blinded.—It must not be; nay, shou'd my Lady know it—ay, then were fine Work indeed! Her Fury wou'd spare nothing, tho' she involv'd her self in Ruin. No, it must be by Stratagem—I must deceive
Mellefont
once more, and get my Lord to consent to my private Management. He comes opportunely—Now will I, in my old way, discover the whole and real truth of the Matter to him, that he may not suspect one Word on't.
No Mask like open Truth to cover Lies,
As to go Naked is the best Disguise.
Enter
Mellefont.
O
Maskwell,
what Hopes? I am confounded in a maze of Thoughts, each leading into one another, and all ending in Perplexity. My Uncle will not see, nor hear me.
No matter, Sir, don't trouble your Head, all's in my Power.
How? For Heav'ns sake?
Little do you think that your Aunt has kept her Word,—How the Devil she wrought my Lord into this Dotage, I know not; but he's gone to Sir
Paul
about my Marriage with
Cynthia,
and has appointed me his Heir.
The Devil he has! What's to be done?
I have it, it must be by Stratagem; for it's in vain to make Application to him. I think I have that in my Head that cannot fail: Where's
Cynthia?
In the Garden.
Let us go and consult her, my Life for yours, I cheat my Lord.
[Exeunt.
Enter Lord
Touchwood,
Lady
Touchwood.
Maskwell
your Heir, and marry
Cynthia!
I cannot do too much, for so much Merit.
But this is a thing of too great Moment to be so suddenly resolv'd. Why
Cynthia?
Why must he be Married? Is there not Reward enough in raising his low Fortune, but he must mix his Blood with mine, and wed my Niece? How know you that my Brother will consent, or she? Nay, he himself perhaps may have Affections otherwhere.
No, I am convinc'd he loves her.
Maskwell
love
Cynthia,
impossible!
I told you, he confess'd it to me.
Confusion! How's this!
[Aside.
His Humility long stifled his Passion: And his Love of
Mellefont
would have made him still conceal it.—But by Encouragement, I wrung the Secret from him; and know he's no way to be rewarded but in her. I'll defer my farther Proceedings in it, 'till you have consider'd it; but remember how we are both indebted to him.
[Exit.
Both indebted to him! Yes, we are both indebted to him, if you knew all, damn'd Villain! Oh, I am wild with this Surprize of Treachery: Hell and Fire, it is impossible, it cannot be.—He Love
Cynthia!
What have I been Bawd to his Designs, his Property only, a baiting Place to stay his Stomach in the Road to her; now I see what made him false to
Mellefont,
—Shame and Destruction! I cannot bear it, oh! what Woman can bear to be a Property? To be kindled to a Flame, only to light him to another's Arms; oh! that I were Fire indeed, that I might burn the vile Traitor to a Hell of Torments,—But he's Damnation proof, a Devil already, and Fire is his Element. What shall I do? How shall I think? I cannot think,—All my Designs are lost, my Love unsated, my Revenge unfinish'd, and fresh cause of Fury from unthought of Plagues.
Enter Sir
Paul.
Madam, Sister, my Lady Sister, did you see my Lady my Wife?
Oh! Torture!
Gad's-bud, I can't find her high nor low; where can she be, think you?
Where she's serving you, as your Sex ought to be serv'd; making you a Beast. Don't you know that you're a Fool, Brother?
A Fool; he, he, he, you're merry—No, no, not I, I know no such matter.
Why then you don't know half your Happiness.
That's a Jest with all my Heart, faith and troth,—But harkee, my Lord told me something of a Revolution of things; I don't know what to make on't,—Gad's-bud I must consult my Wife,—he talks of disinheriting his Nephew; and I don't know what,—Look you, Sister, I must know what my Girl has to trust to; or nor a Syllable of a Wedding, gad's-bud—to shew you that I am not a Fool.
Hear me; consent to the breaking off this Marriage, and the promoting any other, without consulting me, and I'll renounce all Blood, all Relation and Concern with you for ever,—nay, I'll be your Enemy, and pursue you to Destruction, I'll tear your Eyes out, and tread you under my Feet.—
Why, what's the matter now? Good Lord, what's all this for? Pooh, here's a Joke indeed—Why, where's my Wife?
With
Careless,
in the close Arbour; he may want you by this time, as much as you want her.
O, if she be with Mr.
Careless,
'tis well enough.
Fool, Sot, insensible Ox! But remember what I said to you, or you had better eat your Horns, and pimp for your Living; by this Light you had.
[Exit.
She's a passionate Woman, gads-bud,—But to say truth, all our Family are Cholerick; I am the only peaceable Person amongst 'em.
[Exit.
Enter
Mellefont, Maskwell,
and
Cynthia.
I know no other Way but this he has propos'd; if you have Love enough to run the Venture.
I don't know whether I have Love enough,—but I find I have Obstinacy enough to pursue whatever I have once resolv'd; and a true Female Courage to oppose any thing that resists my Will, tho' 'twere Reason it self.
That's right,—Well, I'll secure the Writings, and run the Hazard along with you.
But how can the Coach and Six Horses be got ready without Suspicion?
Leave it to my Care; that shall be so far from being suspected, that it shall be got ready by my Lord's own Order.
How?
Why, I intend to tell my Lord the whole matter of our Contrivance, that's my way.
I don't understand you.
Why, I'll tell my Lord, I laid this Plot with you, on purpose to betray you; and that which put me upon it, was, the finding it impossible to gain the Lady any other way, but in the Hopes of her Marrying you.—
So—
So, why so, while you're busied in making your self ready, I'll wheedle her into the Coach; and instead of you, borrow my Lord's Chaplain, and so run away with her my self.
O I conceive you, you'll tell him so?
Tell him so! Ay, why you don't think I mean to do so?
No, no; ha, ha, I dare swear thou wilt not.
(Aside.)
You may be deceiv'd.—Therefore for our farther Security, I would have you disguis'd like a Parson, that if my Lord should have Curiosity to peep, he may not discover you in the Coach, but think the Cheat is carried on as he would have it.
Excellent
Maskwell,
thou wert certainly meant for a Statesman or a Jesuite, but that thou art too honest for one, and too pious for the other.
Well, get your selves ready, and meet me in half an Hour, yonder in my Lady's Dressing-Room; go by the back Stairs, and so we may slip down without being observ'd.—I'll send the Chaplain to you with his Robes; I have made him my own,—and ordered him to meet us to Morrow Morning at St.
Albans;
there we will sum up this Account, to all our Satisfactions.
Should I begin to thank or praise thee, I should waste the little time we have.
[Exit.
Madam, you will be ready?
I will be punctual to the Minute.
[Going.
Stay, I have a doubt—Upon second Thoughts, we had better meet in the Chaplain's Chamber here, the corner Chamber at this end of the Gallery, there is a back Way into it, so that you need not come through this Door—and a Pair of private Stairs leads down to the Stables—It will be more convenient.
I am guided by you,—but
Mellefont
will mistake.
No, no, I'll after him immediately, and tell him.
I will not fail.
[Exit.
Why,
qui vult decipi decipiatur.
—'Tis no Fault of mine, I have told 'em in plain Terms, how easie 'tis for me to cheat 'em; and if they will not hear the Serpent's Hiss, they must be stung into Experience, and future Caution.—Now to prepare my Lord to consent to this.—But first I must instruct my little Levite; there is no Plot, publick or private, that can expect to prosper without one of 'em has a Finger in't, he promised me to be within at this Hour,—Mr.
Saygrace,
Mr.
Saygrace.
[Goes to the Chamber Door, and knocks.
(looking out.)
Sweet Sir, I will but pen the last Line of an Acrostick, and be with you in the twinkling of an Ejaculation, in the pronouncing of an
Amen,
or before you can—
Nay, good Mr.
Saygrace
do not prolong the Time, by describing to me the shortness of you Stay; rather if you please, defer the finishing of your Wit, and let us talk about our Business, it shall be
(Enters)
You shall prevail, I would break off in the middle of a Sermon to do you pleasure.
You could not do me a greater,—except—the Business in hand—Have you provided a Habit for
Mellefont?
I have, they are ready in my Chamber, together with a clean starch'd Band and Cuffs.
Good, let them be carried to him,—have you stitch'd the Gown Sleeve, that he may be puzzled, and waste time in putting it on?
I have; the Gown will not be indued without Perplexity.
Meet me in half an Hour, here in your own Chamber. When
Cynthia
comes, let there be no Light, and do not speak, that she may not distinguish you from
Mellefont.
I'll urge haste, to excuse your Silence.
You have no more Commands?
None, your Text is short.
But pithy, and I will handle it with Discretion.
[Exit.
It will be the first you have so serv'd.
Enter Ld.
Touchwood.
Sure I was born to be controlled by those I should Command: My very Slaves will shortly give me Rules how I shall govern them.
I am concern'd to see your Lordship discompos'd.—
Have you seen my Wife lately, or disoblig'd her?
No, my Lord. What can this mean!
[Aside.
Then
Mellefont
has urg'd some body to incense her—Something she has heard of you which carries her beyond the Bounds of Patience.
This I fear'd.
(Aside.)
Did not your Lordship tell her of the Honours you design'd me?
Yes.
'Tis that; you know my Lady has a high Spirit, she thinks I am unworthy.
Unworthy! 'Tis an ignorant Pride in her to think so—Honesty to me is true Nobility. However, 'tis my Will it should be so, and that shou'd be convincing to her as much as Reason—By Heav'n, I'll not be Wife-ridden; were it possible, it should be done this Night.
By Heav'n he meets my Wishes.
(Aside.)
Few Things are impossible to willing Minds.
Instruct me how this may be done, you shall see I want no Inclination.
I had laid a small Design for to Morrow (as Love will be inventing) which I thought to communicate to your Lordship—But it may be as well done to Night.
Here's Company—Come this way, and tell me.
[Exeunt.
Enter
Careless
and
Cynthia.
Is not that he, now gone out with my Lord?
Yes.
By Heav'n there's Treachery—The Confusion that I saw your Father in, my Lady
Touchwood
's Passion, with what imperfectly I over-heard between my Lord and her, confirm me in my Fears. Where's
Mellefont?
Here he comes.
Enter
Mellefont.
Did
Maskwell
tell you any thing of the Chaplain's Chamber?
No; my Dear, will you get ready—the Things are all in my Chamber; I want nothing but the Habit.
You are betray'd, and
Maskwell
is the Villain I always thought him.
When you were gone, he said his Mind was chang'd, and bid me meet him in the Chaplain's Room, pretending immediately to follow you, and give you notice.
How!
There's
Saygrace
tripping by with a Bundle under his Arm—He cannot be ignorant that
Maskwell
means to use his Chamber; let's follow and examine him.
'Tis loss of time—I cannot think him false.
[Exeunt
Mel.
and
Care.
My Lord musing!
Enter Ld.
Touchwood.
He has a quick Invention, if this were suddenly design'd—Yet he says he had prepar'd my Chaplain already.
How's this! Now I fear indeed.
Cynthia
here! alone, fair Cousin, and melancholy?
Your Lordship was thoughtful.
My Thoughts were on serious Business, not worth your Hearing.
Mine were on Treachery concerning you, and may be worth your Hearing.
Treachery concerning me! pray be plain—Hark! What Noise!
(within)
Will you not hear me?
(within)
No, Monster! Hellish Traitor! No.
My Lady and
Maskwell!
this may be lucky—My Lord, let me intreat you to stand behind this Skreen, and listen; perhaps this Chance may give you proof of what you ne'er could have believ'd from my Suspicions.
[They abscond.
Enter Lady
Touchwood
with a Dagger,
Maskwell.
You want but Leisure to invent fresh Falshood, and sooth me to a fond Belief of all your Fictions; but I will stab the Lie that's forming in your Heart, and save a Sin, in pity to your Soul.
Strike then—Since you will have it so.
Ha! A steady Villain to the last!
Come, why do you dally with me thus?
Thy stubborn Temper shocks me, and you knew it would—By Heav'n, this is Cunning all, and not Courage; no, I know thee well: But thou shalt miss thy Aim.
Ha, ha, ha.
Ha! Do you mock my Rage? Then this shall punish your fond, rash Contempt! Again Smile!
[Goes to strike.
And such a Smile as speaks in Ambiguity! Ten thousand Meanings lurk in each Corner of that various Face. O! That they were written in thy Heart, That I, with this, might lay thee open to my Sight! But then 'twill be too late to know—
Thou hast, thou hast found the only way to turn my Rage; Too well thou know'st my jealous Soul cou'd never bear Uncertainty. Speak then, and tell me—Yet are you silent? Oh, I am wilder'd in all Passions! But thus my Anger melts.
(Weeps)
Here, take this Ponyard, for my very Spirits faint, and I want Strength to hold it, thou hast disarm'd my Soul.
[Gives the Dagger.
Amazement shakes me—Where will this end?
So, 'tis well—let your wild Fury have a Vent; and when you have Temper, tell me.
Now, now now I am calm, and can hear you.
(Aside.)
Thanks, my Invention; and now I have it for you.—First tell me what urg'd you to this Violence? For your Passion broke in such imperfect Terms, that yet I am to learn the Cause.
My Lord himself surpriz'd me with the News, you were to marry
Cynthia
—That you had own'd your Love to him, and his Indulgence would assist you to attain your Ends.
How, my Lord!
Pray forbear all Resentments for a while, and let us hear the rest.
I grant you in Appearance all is true; I seem'd consenting to my Lord; nay, transported with the Blessing—But could you think that I who had been happy in your lov'd Embraces, could e'er be fond of an inferior Slavery.
Ha! O Poison to my Ears! What do I hear!
Nay, good my Lord, forbear Resentment, let us hear it out.
Yes, I will contain, tho' I cou'd burst.
I that had wanton'd in the wide Circle of your World of Love, cou'd be confin'd within the puny Province of a Girl. No—Yet tho' I dote on each last Favour more than all the rest; though I would give a Limb for every Look you cheaply throw away on any other Object of your Love; yet so far I prize your Pleasures o'er own, that all this seeming Plot that I have laid, has been to gratifie your Taste, and cheat the World, to prove a faithful Rogue to you.
If this were true—But how can it be?
I have so contriv'd, that
Mellefont
will presently, in the Chaplain's Habit, wait for
Cynthia
in your Dressing-Room: But I have put the Change upon her, that she may be otherwhere employ'd—Do you procure her Night-Gown, and with your Hoods tyed over your Face, meet him in her stead; you may go privately by the back Stairs, and, unperceiv'd, there you may propose to reinstate him in his Uncle's Favour, if he'll comply with your Desires; his Case is desperate, and I believe he'll yield to any Conditions,—If not, here take this; you may employ it better, than in the Death of one who is nothing when not yours.
[Gives the Dagger.
Thou can'st deceive every Body,—Nay, thou hast deceiv'd me; but 'tis as I would wish,—Trusty Villain! I could worship thee.—
No more,—There wants but a few Minutes of the time; and
Mellefont
's Love will carry him there before his Hour.
I go, I fly, incomparable
Maskwell!
[Exit.
So, this was a Pinch indeed, my Invention was upon the Rack; and made Discovery of her last Plot: I hope
Cynthia
and my Chaplain will be ready, I'll prepare for the Expedition.
[Exit.
Cynthia,
and Lord
Touchwood,
come forward.
Now, my Lord?
Astonishment binds up my Rage! Villany upon Villany! Heav'ns, what a long Track of dark Deceit has this discover'd! I am confounded when I look back, and want a Clue to guide me through the various Mazes of unheard of Treachery. My Wife! Damnation! my Hell!
My Lord, have Patience, and be sensible how great our Happiness is, that this Discovery was not made too late.
I thank you, yet it may be still too late, if we don't presently prevent the Execution of their Plots;—Ha, I'll do't. Where's
Mellefont,
my poor injur'd Nephew,—How shall I make him ample Satisfaction?—
I dare answer for him.
I do him fresh Wrong to question his Forgiveness; for I know him to be all Goodness,—Yet my Wife! Dam her,—She'll think to meet him in that Dressing-Room,—Was't not so? And
Maskwell
will expect you in the Chaplain's Chamber,—For once, I'll add my Plot too,—let us haste to find out, and inform my Nephew; and do you, quickly as you can, bring all the Company into this Gallery.—I'll expose the Strumpet, and the Villain.
[Exeunt.
Enter Ld.
Froth
and Sir
Paul.
By Heav'ns I have slept an Age,—Sir
Paul,
what a Clock is't? Past Eight, on my Conscience, my Lady's is the most inviting Couch; and a Slumber there, is the prettiest Amusement! But where's all the Company?—
The Company, gads-bud, I don't know, my Lord, but here's the strangest Revolution, all turn'd topsie turvy; as I hope for Providence.
O Heav'ns, what's the matter? Where's my Wife?
All turn'd topsie turvy, as sure as a Gun.
How do you mean? My Wife!
The strangest Posture of Affairs!
What, my Wife?
No, no, I mean the Family,—Your Lady's Affairs may be in a very good Posture; I saw her go into the Garden with Mr.
Brisk.
How? where, when, what to do?
I suppose they have been laying their Heads together.
How?
Nay, only about Poetry, I suppose, my Lord; making Couplets.
Couplets.
O, here they come.
Enter Lady
Froth, Brisk.
My Lord, your humble Servant; Sir
Paul
yours,—
My Dear, Mr.
Brisk
and I have been Star-gazing, I don't know how long.
Does it not tire your Ladyship? are not you weary with looking up?
Oh, no, I love it violently,—My Dear, you're melancholly.
No, my Dear; I'm but just awake.—
Snuff some of my Spirit of Hartshorn.
I've some of my own, thank you, my Dear.
Well, I swear, Mr.
Brisk,
you understood Astronomy like an old
Egyptian.
Not comparable to your Ladyship; you are the very
Cynthia
of the Skies, and Queen of Stars.
That's because I have no Light, but what's by Reflection from you, who are the Sun.
Madam, you have Eclips'd me quite, let me perish,—I can't answer that.
No matter,—Hark'ee, shall you and I make an Almanack together.
With all my Soul,—Your Ladyship has made me the Man in't already, I'm so full of the Wounds which you have given.
O finely taken! I swear now you are even with me, O
Parnassus,
you have an infinite deal of Wit.
So he has, gads-bud, and so has your Ladyship.
Enter Lady
Plyant, Careless, Cynthia.
You tell me most surprizing things; bless me, who would ever trust a Man? O my Heart akes for fear they should be all deceitful alike.
You need not fear, Madam, you have Charms to fix Inconstancy it self.
O dear, you make me blush.
Come, my Dear, shall we take leave of my Lord and Lady?
They'll wait upon your Lordship presently.
Mr.
Brisk,
my Coach shall set you down.
What's the matter?
[A great Shriek from the Corner of the Stage. Lady
Touchwood
runs out affrighted, my Lord after her, like a Parson.
O I'm betray'd.—Save me, help me.
Now what Evasion, Strumpet?
Stand off, let me go, and Plagues and Curses seize you all.
[Runs out.
Go, and thy own Infamy pursue thee.—You stare as you were all amazed,—I don't wonder at it,—but too soon you'll know mine, and that Woman's Shame.
Enter
Mellefont
lugging in
Maskwell
from the other side of the Stage,
Mellefont
like a Parson.
Nay, by Heav'n you shall be seen.—
Careless,
your Hand;—Do you hold down your Head? Yes, I am your Chaplain, look in the Face of your injur'd Friend; thou Wonder of all Falshood.
Are you silent, Monster?
Good Heav'ns! How I believ'd and lov'd this Man!—Take him hence, for he's a Disease to my Sight.
Secure that manifold Villain.
Miracle of Ingratitude!
[They carry out
Maskwell,
who hangs down his Head.
This is all very surprizing, let me perish
You know I told you
Saturn
look'd a little more angry than usual.
We'll think of Punishment at Leisure, but let me hasten to do Justice, in rewarding Virtue and wrong'd Innocence.—Nephew, I hope I have your Pardon, and
Cynthia's.
We are your Lordship's Creatures.
And be each others Comfort;—Let me join your Hands.—Unwearied Nights, and wishing Days attend you both; mutual Love, lasting Health, and circling Joys, tread round each happy Year of your long Lives.
Let secret Villany from hence be warn'd;
Howe'er in private Mischiefs are conceiv'd,
Torture and Shame attend their open Birth:
Like Vipers in the Womb, base Treachery lies,
Still gnawing that, whence first it did arise;
No sooner born, but the Vile Parent dies.
[Exeunt Omnes.
EPILOGUE,
Spoken by Mrs.
Mountford.
COuld Poets but foresee how Plays would take,
Then they could tell what Epilogues to make;
Whether to thank or blame their Audience most:
But that late Knowledge does much Hazard cost,
'Till Dice are thrown, there's nothing won, nor lost.
So 'till the Thief has stoll'n, he cannot know
Whether he shall escape the Law, or no.
But Poets run much greater Hazards far,
Than they who stand their Trials at the Barr;
The Law provides a Curb for its own Fury,
And suffers Judges to direct the Jury.
But in this Court, what Diff'rence does appear!
For every one's both Judge and Jury here;
Nay, and what's worse, an Executioner.
All have a Right and Title to some Part,
Each chusing that in which he has most Art.
The dreadful Men of Learning all Confound,
Unless the Fable's good, and Moral sound.
The Vizor-Masks, that are in Pit and Gallery,
Approve, or Damn, the Repartee and Rallery.
The Lady Criticks, who are better read,
Enquire if Characters are nicely bred;
If the soft things are penn'd and spoke with Grace:
They Judge of Action too, and Time, and Place;
In which we do not doubt but they're discerning,
For that's a kind of
Assignation Learning.
Beaus judge of Dress; the Witlings judge of Songs;
The Cuckoldom, of Ancient Right, to Cits belongs.
Thus poor Poets, the Favour are deny'd,
Even to make Exceptions, when they're Try'd.
'Tis hard that they must ev'ry one admit;
Methinks I see some Faces in the Pit,
Which must of Consequence be Foes to Wit.
You who can Judge, to Sentence may proceed;
But tho' he cannot Write, let him be freed
At least from their Contempt, who cannot Read.
FINIS.
BOOKS Printed for
Jacob Tonson,
at
Grays-Inn
Gate.
THE Campaign a Poem, to his Grace the Duke of
Marlborough.
Remarks on several Parts of
Italy,
&c. In the Years, 1701, 1702, 1703. Both written by Mr.
Addison.
A Letter to Monsieur
Boileau Depreaux:
Occasion'd by the Victory at
Blenheim.
Love for Love, Mourning Bride, and the Way of the World. Written by Mr.
Congreve.
Tamerlane,
Fair Penitent, Biter, and
Ulysses.
Written by
Nicolas Rowe,
Esq
The False Friend, Confederacy, and the Mistake. Written by the Author of the Relapse, Provok'd Wife, and
Aesop.
The Christian Hero, an Argument, proving that no Principles but those of Religion are sufficient to make a Great Man; and that true Greatness of Mind can be maintain'd by none but Christian Principles. The Funeral or Grief A-la-mode, and the Tender Husband, Comedies. All three Written by Capt.
Steele.
Arsinoe,
Queen of
Cyprus,
an Opera.
All the Poetical Works of Mr.
John Milton,
in Two Volumes in Octavo; Adorn'd with Cuts.
The Third, Fourth and Fifth Volumes of the
Roman
History. Containing the Transactions of those Times: From the Removal of the Imperial Seat by
Constantine
the Great, to the Taking of
Constantinople
by the
Turks;
Including 1123 Years. All Three Revis'd, with a Recommendatory Preface, by
Laurence Echard,
A. M. Being a Continuation of his
Roman
History.
Oeuvres Meslees De Mr.
De Saint Evremond,
Publiés sur les Manuscripts de l'Auteur, in 3 Vol.
Ovid
's Epistles, Translated by several of the most Eminent Hands: Adorn'd with Cuts. The Seventh Edition: To which is added, a Dedication to the Lady
Lovisa Lenos.
Poems on several Occasions; with
Valentinian,
a Tragedy: Written by the Right Honourable
John
late Earl of
Rochester.
Poems, &c. Written upon several Occasions, and to several Persons; by
Edmond Waller,
Esq
the Seventh Edition, with Additions.
Poems and Translations, with the Soplus; written by the Honourable Sir
John Denham,
Knight of the Bath. The Fourth Edition; to which is added,
Cato Major,
of Old Age.
The Works of Sir
George Etheredge,
containing his Plays and Poems.
The Works of the late famous Mr.
John Dryden
in 4. Vols. in Fol. Containing all his Comedies, Tragedies and Opera's, with his Original Poems and Translations.
The Satyrs of
Decimus Junius Juvenalis,
translated into Verse: By Mr.
Dryden,
and several other Eminent Hands; together with the Satyrs of
Aulus Perseus Flaccus,
made English by Mr.
Dryden;
with Explanatory Notes at the End of each Satyr: To which is perfix'd a Discourse concerning the Original and Progress of Satyr. Dedicated to the Right Honourable
Charles
Earl of
Dorset,
&c. All by Mr.
Dryden.
The Works of Mr.
Abraham Cowley,
consisting of those which were formerly Printed, and those which he design'd for the Press; now Publish'd out of the Author's Original Copies. The Ninth Edition: To which is added The Cutter of
Coleman-Street,
and several Commendatory Copies of Verses on the Author, by Persons of Honour.
The Works of Sir
John Suckling,
containing all his Poems, Love Verses, Songs, Letters, and his Tragedies, and Comedies. Never before Printed in one Vol.
Horace, Virgil, Terence, Catullus, Tibullus
and
Propertius
in Four large Vols. in Quarto, Printed in
Cambridge.
Seneca
's Morals by way of Abstract: To which is added a Discourse under the Title of an After-Tho
The Ninth Edition.
Tully
's Offices in Three Bo
English.
The Fifth Edition: To which
A Guide to E
Bona,
and now done into
ition. These last by Sir
Roger L'Estrange,
A New Voyage to
Account of the most remarkable Curio
Italy, Malta
and
Turky;
with Histori
to the Present and Ancient State of
By the Sieur
du Mont.
Done into
English,
and
Figures. The Fourth Edition.
Thoughts on Religion
, by
Monsieur Pascal.
Translated from the
Corpus Christi
College,
Oxon.
FINIS
