The Second Part of Henry the Fourth, Containing his Death: and the Coronation of King Henry the Fift.
Actus Primus. Scoena Prima.
INDVCTION.
Enter Rumour.
Open your Eares: For which of you will stop The vent of Hearing, when loud
Rumor
speakes? I, from the Orient, to the drooping West (Making the winde my Post-horse) still vnfold The Acts commenced on this Ball of Earth. Vpon my Tongue, continuall Slanders ride, The which, in euery Language, I pronounce, Stuffing the Eares of them with false Reports: I speake of Peace, while couert Enmitie (Vnder the smile of Safety) wounds the World: And who but
Rumour,
who but onely I Make fearfull Musters, and prepar'd Defence, Whil'st the bigge yeare, swolne with some other griefes, Is thought with childe, by the sterne Tyrant, Warre, And no such matter?
Rumour,
is a Pipe Blowne by Surmises, Ielousies, Coniectures; And of so easie, and so plaine a stop, That the blunt Monster, with vncounted heads, The still discordant, wauering Multitude, Can play vpon it. But what neede I thus My well-knowne Body to Anathomize Among my houshold? Why is
Rumour
heere? I run before King
Harries
victory, Who in a bloodie field by Shrewsburie Hath beaten downe yong
Hotspurre,
and his Troopes, Quenching the flame of bold Rebellion, Euen with the Rebels blood. But what meane I To speake so true at first? My Office is To noyse abroad, that
Harry Monmouth
fell Vnder the Wrath of Noble
Hotspurres
Sword: And that the King, before the
Dowglas
Rage Stoop'd his Annointed head, as low as death. This haue I rumour'd through the peasant-Townes, Betweene the Royall Field of Shrewsburie, And this Worme-eaten-Hole of ragged Stone, Where
Hotspurres
Father, old Northumberland, Lyes crafty sicke. The Postes come tyring on, And not a man of them brings other newes Then they haue learn'd of Me. From
Rumours
Tongues, They bring smooth-Comforts-false, worse then True-wrongs.
Exit.
Scena Secunda.
Enter Lord Bardolfe, and the Porter.
Who keepes the Gate heere hoa? Where is the Earle?
What shall I say you are?
Tell thou the Earle That the Lord
Bardolfe
doth attend him heere.
His Lordship is walk'd forth into the Orchard, Please it your Honor, knocke but at the Gate, And he himselfe will answer.
Enter Northumberland.
Heere comes the Earle.
What newes Lord
Bardolfe
? Eu'ry minute now Should be the Father of some Stratagem; The Times are wilde: Contention (like a Horse Full of high Feeding) madly hath broke loose, And beares downe all before him.
Noble Earle, I bring you certaine newes from Shrewsbury.
Good,
and
heauen will.
As good as heart can wish: The King is almost wounded to the death: And in the Fortune of my Lord your Sonne, Prince
Harrie
slaine out-right: and both the
Blunts
Kill'd by the hand of
Dowglas.
Yong Prince
Iohn,
And Westmerland, and Stafford, fled the Field. And
Harrie Monmouth's
Brawne (the Hulke Sir
Iohn
) Is prisoner to your Sonne. O, such a Day, (So fought, so follow'd, and so fairely wonne) Came not, till now, to dignifie the Times Since
Caesars
Fortunes.
How is this deriu'd? Saw you the Field? Came you from Shrewsbury?
I spake with one (my L[ord].) that came fro[m] thence, A Gentleman well bred, and of good name, That freely render'd me these newes for true.
Heere comes my Seruant
Trauers,
whom I sent On Tuesday last, to listen after Newes.
Enter Trauers.
My Lord, I ouer-rod him on the way, And he is furnish'd with no certainties, More then he (haply) may retaile from me.
Now
Trauers,
what good tidings comes fro[m] you?
My Lord, Sir
Iohn Vmfreuill
turn'd me backe With ioyfull tydings; and (being better hors'd) Out-rod me. After him, came spurring head A Gentleman (almost fore-spent with speed) That stopp'd by me, to breath his bloodied horse. He ask'd the way to Chester: And of him I did demand what Newes from Shrewsbury: He told me, that Rebellion had
ill
lucke, And that yong
Harry Percies
Spurre was cold. With that he gaue his able Horse the head, And bending forwards strooke his able heeles Against the panting sides of his poore Iade Vp to the Rowell head, and starting so, He seem'd in running, to deuoure the way, Staying no longer question.
Ha? Againe: Said he yong
Harrie Percyes
Spurre was cold? (Of
Hot-Spurre,
cold-Spurre?) that Rebellion, Had met
ill
lucke?
My Lord: Ile tell you what, If my yong Lord your Sonne, haue not the day, Vpon mine Honor, for a silken point Ile giue my Barony. Neuer talke of it.
Why should the Gentleman that rode by
Trauers
Giue then such instances of Losse?
Who, he? He was some hielding Fellow, that had stolne The Horse he rode-on: and vpon my life Speake at aduenture. Looke, here comes more Newes.
Enter Morton.
Yea, this mans brow, like to a Title-leafe, Fore-tels the Nature of a Tragicke Volume: So lookes the Strond, when the Imperious Flood Hath left a witnest Vsurpation. Say
Morton,
did'st thou come from Shrewsbury?
I ran from Shrewsbury (my Noble Lord) Where hatefull death put on his vgliest Maske To fright our party.
How doth my Sonne, and Brother? Thou trembl'st; and the whitenesse in thy Cheeke Is apter then thy Tongue, to tell thy Errand. Euen such a man, so faint, so spiritlesse, So dull, so dead in looke, so woe-be-gone, Drew
Priams
Curtaine, in the dead of night, And would haue told him, Halfe his Troy was burn'd. But
Priam
found the Fire, ere he his Tongue: And I, my
Percies
death, ere thou report'st it. This, thou would'st say: Your Sonne did thus, and thus: Your Brother, thus. So fought the Noble
Dowglas,
Stopping my greedy eare, with their bold deeds. But in the end (to stop mine Eare indeed) Thou hast a Sigh, to blow away this Praise, Ending with Brother, Sonne, and all are dead.
Dowglas
is liuing, and your Brother, yet: But for my Lord, your Sonne.
Why, he is dead. See what a ready tongue Suspition hath: He that but feares the thing, he would not know, Hath by Instinct, knowledge from others Eyes, That what he feard, is chanc'd. Yet speake (
Morton
) Tell thou thy Earle, his Diuination Lies, And I will take it, as a sweet Disgrace, And make thee rich, for doing me such wrong.
You are too great, to be (by me) gainsaid: Your Spirit is too true, your Feares too certaine.
Yet for all this, say not that
Percie
s dead. I see a strange Confession in thine Eye: Thou shak'st thy head, and hold'st it Feare, or Sinne, To speake a truth. If he be slaine, say so: The Tongue offends not, that reports his death: And he doth sinne that doth belye the dead: Not he, which sayes the dead is not aliue: Yet the first bringer of vnwelcome Newes Hath but a loosing Office: and his Tongue, Sounds euer after as a sullen Bell Remembred, knolling a departing Friend.
I cannot thinke (my Lord) your son is dead.
I am sorry, I should force you to beleeue That, which I would to heauen, I had not seene. But these mine eyes, saw him in bloody state, Rend'ring faint quittance (wearied, and out-breath'd) To
Henrie Monmouth,
whose swift wrath beate downe The neuer-daunted
Percie
to the earth, From whence (with life) he neuer more sprung vp. In few; his death (whose spirit lent a fire, Euen to the dullest Peazant in his Campe) Being bruited once, tooke fire and heate away From the best temper'd Courage in his Troopes. For from his Mettle, was his Party steel'd; Which once, in him abated, all the rest Turn'd on themselues, like dull and heauy Lead: And as the Thing, that's heauy in it selfe, Vpon enforcement, flyes with greatest speede, So did our Men, heauy in
Hotspurres
losse, Lend to this weight, such lightnesse with their Feare, That Arrowes fled not swifter toward their ayme, Then did our Soldiers (ayming at their safety) Fly from the field. Then was that Noble Worcester Too soone ta'ne prisoner: and that furious Scot, (The bloody
Dowglas
) whose well-labouring sword Had three times slaine th' appearance of the King, Gan vaile his stomacke, and did grace the shame Of those that turn'd their backes: and in his flight, Stumbling in Feare, was tooke. The summe of all, Is, that the King hath wonne: and hath sent out A speedy power, to encounter you my Lord, Vnder the Conduct of yong Lancaster And Westmerland. This is the Newes at full.
For this, I shall haue time enough to mourne. In Poyson, there is Physicke: and this newes (Hauing beene well) that would haue made me sicke, Being sicke, haue in some measure, made me well. And as the Wretch, whose Feauer-weakned ioynts, Like strengthlesse Hindges, buckle vnder life, Impatient of his Fit, breakes like a fire Out of his keepers armes: Euen so, my Limbes (Weak'ned with greefe) being now inrag'd with greefe, Are thrice themselues. Hence therefore thou nice crutch, A scalie Gauntlet now, with ioynts of Steele Must gloue this hand. And hence thou sickly Quoife, Thou art a guard too wanton for the head, Which Princes, flesh'd with Conquest, ayme to hit. Now binde my Browes with Iron and approach The ragged'st houre, that Time and Spight dare bring To frowne vpon th' enrag'd Northumberland. Let Heauen kisse Earth: now let not Natures hand Keepe the wilde Flood confin'd: Let Order dye, And let the world no longer be a stage To feede Contention in a ling'ring Act: But let one spirit of the First-borne
Caine
Reigne in all bosomes, that each heart being set On bloody Courses, the rude Scene may end, And darknesse be the burier of the dead.
Sweet Earle, diuorce not wisedom from your
Honor
.
The liues of all your louing Complices Leane-on your health, the which if you giue-o're To stormy Passion, must perforce decay. You cast th' euent of Warre (my Noble Lord) And summ'd the accompt of Chance, before you said Let vs make head: It was your presurmize, That in the dole of blowes, your Son might drop. You knew he walk'd o're perils, on an edge More likely to fall in, then to get o're: You were aduis'd his flesh was capeable Of Wounds, and Scarres; and that his forward Spirit Would lift him, where most trade of danger rang'd, Yet did you say go forth: and none of this (Though strongly apprehended) could restraine The stiffe-borne Action: What hath then befalne? Or what hath this bold enterprize bring forth, More then that
Being
, which was like to be?
We all that are engaged to this losse, Knew that we ventur'd on such dangerous Seas, That if we wrought out life, was ten to one: And yet we ventur'd for the gaine propos'd, Choak'd the respect of likely perill fear'd, And since we are o're-set, venture againe. Come, we will all put forth; Body, and Goods,
'Tis more then time: And (my most Noble Lord) I heare for certaine, and do speake the truth: The gentle Arch-bishop of Yorke is vp With well appointed Powres: he is a man Who with a double Surety bindes his Followers. My Lord (your Sonne) had onely but the Corpes, But shadowes, and the shewes of men to fight. For that same word (Rebellion) did diuide The action of their bodies, from their soules, And they did fight with queasinesse, constrain'd As men drinke Potions; that their Weapons only Seem'd on our side: but for their Spirits and Soules, This word (Rebellion) it had froze them vp, As Fish are in a Pond. But now the Bishop Turnes Insurrection to Religion, Suppos'd sincere, and holy in his Thoughts: He's follow'd both with Body, and with Minde: And doth enlarge his Rising, with the blood Of faire King
Richard,
scrap'd from Pomfret stones, Deriues from heauen, his Quarrell, and his Cause: Tels them, he doth bestride a bleeding Land, Gasping for life, vnder great
Bullingbrooke,
And more, and lesse, do flocke to follow him.
I knew of this before. But to speake truth, This present greefe had wip'd it from my minde. Go in with me, and councell euery man The aptest way for safety, and reuenge: Get Posts, and Letters, and make Friends with speed, Neuer so few, nor neuer yet more need.
Exeunt.
Scena Tertia.
Enter Falstaffe, and Page.
Sirra, you giant, what saies the Doct[or]. to my water?
He said sir, the water it selfe was a good healthy water: but for the party that ow'd it, he might haue more diseases then he knew for.
Men of all sorts take a pride to gird at mee: the braine of this foolish compounded Clay-man, is not able to inuent any thing that tends to laughter, more then I inuent, or is inuented on me. I am not onely witty in my selfe, but the cause that wit is in other men. I doe heere walke before thee, like a Sow, that hath o'rewhelm'd all her Litter, but one. If the Prince put thee into my Ser- uice for any other reason, then to set mee off, why then I haue no iudgement. Thou horson Mandrake, thou art fitter to be worne in my cap, then to wait at my heeles. I was neuer mann'd with an Agot till now: but I will sette you neyther in Gold, nor Siluer, but in vilde apparell, and send you backe againe to your Master, for a Iewell. The
Iuuenall
(the Prince your Master) whose Chin is not yet fledg'd, I will sooner haue a beard grow in the Palme of my hand, then he shall get one on his cheeke: yet he will not sticke to say, his Face is a Face-Royall. Heauen may finish it when he will, it is not a haire amisse yet: he may keepe it still at a Face-Royall, for a Barber shall neuer earne six pence out of it; and yet he will be crowing, as if he had writ man euer since his Father was a Batchellour. He may keepe his owne Grace, but he is almost out of mine, I can assure him. What said M[aster].
Dombledon,
about the Satten for my short Cloake, and Slops?
He said sir, you should procure him better Assu- rance, then
Bardolfe:
he wold not take his Bond & yours, he lik'd not the Security.
Let him bee damn'd like the Glutton, may his Tongue be hotter, a horson
Achitophel;
a Rascally-yea-forsooth-knaue, to beare a Gentleman in hand, and then stand vpon Security? The horson smooth-pates doe now weare nothing but high shoes, and bunches of Keyes at their girdles: and if a man is through with them in ho- nest Taking-vp, then they must stand vpon Securitie: I had as liefe they would put Rats-bane in my mouth, as offer to stoppe it with Security. I look'd hee should haue sent me two and twenty yards of Satten (as I am true Knight) and he sends me Security. Well, he may sleep in Security, for he hath the horne of Abundance: and the lightnesse of his Wife shines through it, and yet cannot he see, though he haue his owne Lanthorne to light him. Where's
Bardolfe
?
He's gone into Smithfield to buy your worship a horse.
I bought him in Paules, and hee'l buy mee a horse in Smithfield. If I could get mee a wife in the Stewes, I were Mann'd, Hors'd, and Wiu'd.
Enter Chiefe Iustice, and Seruant.
Sir, heere comes the Nobleman that committed the Prince for striking him, about
Bardolfe.
Wait close, I will not see him.
What's he that goes there?
Falstaffe,
and't please your Lordship.
He that was in question for the Robbery?
He my Lord, but he hath since done good seruice at Shrewsbury: and (as I heare) is now going with some Charge, to the Lord
Iohn of Lancaster.
What to Yorke? Call him backe againe.
Sir
Iohn Falstaffe.
Boy, tell him, I am deafe.
You must speake lowder, my Master is deafe.
I am sure he is, to the hearing of any thing good. Go plucke him by the Elbow, I must speake with him.
Sir
Iohn.
What? a yong knaue and beg? Is there not wars? Is there not imployment? Doth not the K[ing]. lack subiects? Do not the Rebels want Soldiers? Though it be a shame to be on any side but one, it is worse shame to begge, then to be on the worst side, were it worse then the name of Re- bellion can tell how to make it.
You mistake me Sir.
Why sir? Did I say you were an honest man? Set- ting my Knight-hood, and my Souldiership aside, I had lyed in my throat, if I had said so.
I pray you (Sir) then set your Knighthood and your Souldier-ship aside, and giue mee leaue to tell you, you lye in your throat, if you say I am any other then an honest man.
I giue thee leaue to tell me so? I lay a-side that which growes to me? If thou get'st any leaue of me, hang me: if thou tak'st leaue, thou wer't better be hang'd: you Hunt-counter, hence: Auant.
Sir, my Lord would speake with you.
Sir
Iohn Falstaffe,
a word with you.
My good Lord: giue your Lordship good time of the day. I am glad to see your Lordship abroad: I heard say your Lordship was sicke. I hope your Lordship goes abroad by aduise. Your Lordship (though not clean past your youth) hath yet some smack of age in you: some rel- lish of the saltnesse of Time, and I most humbly beseech your Lordship, to haue a reuerend care of your health.
Sir
Iohn,
I sent you before your Expedition, to Shrewsburie.
If it please your Lordship, I heare his Maiestie is return'd with some discomfort from Wales.
I talke not of his Maiesty: you would not come when I sent for you?
And I heare moreouer, his Highnesse is falne into this same whorson Apoplexie.
Well, heauen mend him. I pray let me speak with
you
.
This Apoplexie is (as I take it) a kind of Lethar- gie, a sleeping of the blood, a horson Tingling.
What tell you me of it? be it as it is.
It hath
it
originall from much greefe; from study and perturbation of the braine. I haue read the cause of his effects in
Galen.
It is a kinde of deafenesse.
I thinke you are falne into the disease: For you heare not what I say to you.
Very well (my Lord) very well: rather an't please you) it is the disease of not Listning, the malady of not Marking, that I am troubled withall.
To punish you by the heeles, would amend the attention of your eares, & I care not if I be your Physitian
I am as poore as
Iob,
my Lord; but not so Patient: your Lordship may minister the Potion of imprisonment to me, in respect of Pouertie: but how I should bee your Patient, to follow your prescriptions, the wise may make some dram of a scruple, or indeede, a scruple it selfe.
I sent for you (when there were matters against you for your life) to come speake with me.
As I was then aduised by my learned Councel, in the lawes of this Land-seruice, I did not come.
Wel, the truth is (sir
Iohn
) you liue in great infamy
He that buckles him in my belt, ca[n]not liue in lesse.
Your Meanes is very slender, and your
wast
great.
I would it were otherwise: I would my Meanes were greater, and my waste slenderer.
You haue misled the youthfull Prince.
The yong Prince hath misled mee. I am the Fel- low with the great belly, and he my Dogge.
Well, I am loth to gall a new-heal'd wound: your daies seruice at Shrewsbury, hath a little gilded ouer your Nights exploit on Gads-hill. You may thanke the vnquiet time, for your quiet o're-posting that Action.
My Lord?
But since all is wel, keep it so: wake not a sleeping
Wolfe
.
To wake a Wolfe, is as bad as to smell a Fox.
What? you are as a candle, the better part burnt out
A Wassell-Candle, my Lord; all Tallow: if I did say of wax, my growth would approue the truth.
There is not a white haire on your face, but shold haue his effect of grauity.
His effect of grauy, grauy, grauy.
You follow the yong Prince vp and downe, like his euill Angell.
Not so (my Lord) your
ill
Angell is light: but I hope, he that lookes vpon mee, will take mee without, weighing: and yet, in some respects I grant, I cannot go: I cannot tell. Vertue is of so little regard in these Costor- mongers, that true valor is turn'd Beare-heard. Pregnan- cie is made a Tapster, and hath his quicke wit wasted in giuing Recknings: all the other gifts appertinent to man (as the malice of this Age shapes them) are not woorth a Gooseberry. You that are old, consider not the capaci- ties of vs that are yong: you measure the heat of our Li- uers, with the bitternes of your gals: & we that are in the vaward of our youth, I must confesse, are wagges too.
Do you set downe your name in the scrowle of youth, that are written downe old, with all the Charrac- ters of age? Haue you not a moist eye? a dry hand? a yel- low cheeke? a white beard? a decreasing leg? an incresing belly? Is not your voice broken? your winde short? your wit single? and euery part about you blasted with Anti- quity? and wil you cal your selfe yong? Fy, fy, fy, sir
Iohn.
My Lord, I was borne with a white head, & som- thing a round belly. For my voice, I haue lost it with hal- lowing and singing of Anthemes. To approue my youth farther, I will not: the truth is, I am onely olde in iudge- ment and vnderstanding: and he that will caper with mee for a thousand Markes, let him lend me the mony, & haue at him. For the boxe of th' eare that the Prince gaue you, he gaue it like a rude Prince, and you tooke it like a sensi- ble Lord. I haue checkt him for it, and the yong Lion re- pents: Marry not in ashes and sacke-cloath, but in new Silke, and old Sacke.
Wel, heauen send the Prince a better companion.
Heauen send the Companion a better Prince: I cannot rid my hands of him.
Well, the King hath seuer'd you and Prince
Har-ry,
I heare you are going with Lord
Iohn
of Lancaster, a- gainst the Archbishop, and the Earle of Northumberland
Yes, I thanke your pretty sweet wit for it: but looke you pray, (all you that kisse my Ladie Peace, at home) that our Armies ioyn not in a hot day: for if I take but two shirts out with me, and I meane not to sweat ex- traordinarily: if it bee a hot day, if I brandish any thing but my Bottle, would I might neuer spit white againe: There is not a daungerous Action can peepe out his head, but I am thrust vpon it. Well, I cannot last euer.
Well, be honest, be honest, and heauen blesse your Expedition.
Will your Lordship lend mee a thousand pound, to furnish me forth?
Not a peny, not a peny: you are too impatient to beare crosses. Fare you well. Commend mee to my Cosin Westmerland.
If I do, fillop me with a three-man-Beetle. A man can no more separate Age and Couetousnesse, then he can part yong limbes and letchery: but the Gowt galles the one, and the pox pinches the other; and so both the De- grees preuent my curses. Boy?
Sir.
What money is in my purse?
Seuen groats, and two pence.
I can get no remedy against this Consumption of the purse. Borrowing onely lingers, and lingers it out, but the disease is incureable. Go beare this letter to my Lord of Lancaster, this to the Prince, this to the Earle of Westmerland, and this to old Mistris
Vrsula,
whome I haue weekly sworne to marry, since I perceiu'd the first white haire on my chin. About it: you know where to finde me. A pox of this Gowt, or a Gowt of this Poxe: for the one or th' other playes the rogue with my great toe: It is no matter, if I do halt, I haue the warres for my colour, and my Pension shall seeme the more reasonable. A good wit will make vse of any thing: I will turne dis- eases to commodity.
Exeunt
Scena Quarta.
Enter Archbishop, Hastings, Mowbray, and Lord Bardolfe.
Thus haue you heard our causes, & kno our Means: And my most noble Friends, I pray you all Speake plainly your opinions of our hopes, And first (Lord Marshall) what say you to it?
I well allow the occasion of our Armes, But gladly would be better satisfied, How (in our Meanes) we should aduance our selues To looke with forhead bold and big enough Vpon the Power and puisance of the King.
Our present Musters grow vpon the File To fiue and twenty thousand men of choice: And our Supplies, liue largely in the hope Of great Northumberland, whose bosome burnes With an incensed Fire of Iniuries.
The question then (Lord
Hastings
) standeth thus Whether our present fiue and twenty thousand May hold-vp-head, without Northumberland:
With him, we may.
I
marry, there's the point: But if without him we be thought
to
feeble, My iudgement is, we should not step too farre Till we had his Assistance by the hand. For in a Theame so bloody fac'd, as this, Coniecture, Expectation, and Surmise Of Aydes incertaine, should not be admitted.
'Tis very true Lord
Bardolfe,
for indeed It was yong
Hotspurres
case, at Shrewsbury.
It was (my Lord) who lin'd himself with hope, Eating the ayre, on promise of Supply, Flatt'ring himselfe with Proiect of a power, Much smaller, then the smallest of his Thoughts, And so with great imagination (Proper to mad men) led his Powers to death, And (winking) leap'd into destruction.
But (by your leaue) it neuer yet did hurt, To lay downe likely-hoods, and formes of hope.
Yes, if this present quality of warre, Indeed the instant action: a cause on foot, Liues so in hope: As in an early Spring, We see th' appearing buds, which to proue fruite, Hope giues not so much warrant, as Dispaire That Frosts will bite them. When we meane to build, We first suruey the Plot, then draw the Modell, And when we see the figure of the house, Then must we rate the cost of the Erection, Which if we finde out-weighes Ability, What do we then, but draw a-new the Modell In fewer offices? Or at least, desist To builde at all? Much more, in this great worke, (Which is (almost) to plucke a Kingdome downe, And set another vp) should we suruey The plot of Situation, and the Modell; Consent vpon a sure Foundation: Question Surueyors, know our owne estate, How able such a Worke to vndergo, To weigh against his Opposite? Or else, We fortifie in Paper, and in Figures, Vsing the Names of men, instead of men: Like one, that drawes the Modell of a house Beyond his power to builde it; who (halfe through) Giues o're, and leaues his part-created Cost A naked subiect to the Weeping Clouds, And waste, for churlish Winters tyranny.
Grant that our hopes (yet likely of faire byrth) Should be still-borne: and that we now possest The vtmost man of expectation: I thinke we are a Body strong enough (Euen as we are) to equall with the King.
What is the King but fiue & twenty thousand?
To vs no more: nay not so much Lord
Bardolf.
For0his diuisions (as the Times do braul) Are in three Heads: one Power against the French, And one against
Glendower:
Perforce a third Must take vp vs: So is the vnfirme King In three diuided: and his Coffers sound With hollow Pouerty, and Emptinesse.
That he should draw his seuerall strengths togither And come against vs in full puissance Need not be dreaded.
If he should do so, He leaues his backe vnarm'd, the French, and Welch Baying him at the heeles: neuer feare that.
Who is it like should lead his Forces hither?
The Duke of Lancaster, and Westmerland: Against the Welsh himselfe, and
Harrie Monmouth.
But who is substituted 'gainst the French, I haue no certaine notice.
Let vs on: And publish the occasion of our Armes. The Common-wealth is sicke of their owne Choice, Their ouer-greedy loue hath surfetted: An habitation giddy, and vnsure Hath he that buildeth on the vulgar heart. O thou fond Many, with what loud applause Did'st thou beate heauen with blessing
Bullingbrooke,
Before he was, what thou would'st haue him be? And being now trimm'd in thine owne desires, Thou (beastly Feeder) art so full of him, That thou prouok'st thy selfe to cast him vp. So, so, (thou common Dogge) did'st thou disgorge Thy glutton-bosome of the Royall
Richard,
And now thou would'st eate thy dead vomit vp, And howl'st to finde it. What trust is in these Times? They, that when
Richard
liu'd, would haue him dye, Are now become enamour'd on his graue. Thou that threw'st dust vpon his goodly head When through proud London he came sighing on, After th' admired heeles of
Bullingbrooke,
Cri'st now, O Earth, yeeld vs that King againe, And take thou this (O thoughts of men accurs'd) "
Past, and to Come, seemes best; things Present, worst.
Shall we go draw our numbers, and set on?
We are Times subiects, and Time bids, be gon.
Actus Secundus. Scoena Prima.
Enter Hostesse, with two Officers, Fang, and Snare.
Mr.
Fang,
haue you entred the Action?
It is enter'd.
Wher's your Yeoman? Is it a lusty yeoman? Will he stand to it?
Sirrah, where's
Snare
?
I
,
I
, good M[aster].
Snare.
Heere, heere.
Snare,
we must Arrest Sir
Iohn Falstaffe.
I
good M[aster].
Snare,
I haue enter'd him, and all.
It may chance cost some of vs our liues: he wil stab
Alas the day: take heed of him: he stabd me in mine owne house, and that most beastly: he cares not what mischeefe he doth, if his weapon be out. Hee will foyne like any diuell, he will spare neither man, woman, nor childe.
If I can close with him, I care not for his thrust.
No, nor I neither: Ile be at your elbow.
If I but fist him once: if he come but within my Vice.
I am vndone with his going: I warrant he is an infinitiue thing vpon my score. Good M[aster].
Fang
hold him sure: good M[aster].
Snare
let him not scape, he comes continu- antly to Py-Corner (sauing your manhoods) to buy a sad- dle, and hee is indited to dinner to the Lubbars head in Lombard
street
, to M[aster].
Smoothes
the Silkman. I pra' ye, since my Exion is enter'd, and my Case so openly known to the world, let him be brought in to his answer: A 100. Marke is a long one, for a poore lone woman to beare: & I haue borne, and borne, and borne, and haue bin fub'd off, and fub'd-off, from this day to that day, that it is a shame to be thought on. There is no honesty in such dealing, vnles a woman should be made an Asse and a Beast, to beare e- uery Knaues wrong.
Enter Falstaffe and Bardolfe.
Yonder he comes, and that arrant Malmesey-Nose
Bar-dolfe
with him. Do your Offices, do your offices: M[aster].
Fang,
& M[aster].
Snare,
do me, do me, do me your Offices.
How now? whose Mare's dead? what's the matter?
Sir
Iohn,
I arrest you, at the suit of Mist.
Quickly.
Away Varlets, draw
Bardolfe:
Cut me off the Villaines head: throw the Queane in the Channel.
Throw me in the channell? Ile throw thee there. Wilt thou? wilt thou? thou bastardly rogue. Murder, mur- der, O thou Hony-suckle villaine, wilt thou kill Gods of- ficers, and the Kings? O thou hony-seed Rogue, thou art a honyseed, a Man-queller, and a woman-queller.
Keep them off,
Bardolfe.
A rescu, a rescu.
Good people bring a rescu. Thou wilt not? thou wilt not? Do, do thou Rogue: Do thou Hempseed.
Away you Scullion, you Rampallian, you Fustil- lirian: Ile tucke your Catastrophe.
Enter Ch. Iustice.
What's the matter? Keepe the Peace here, hoa.
Good my Lord be good to mee. I beseech you stand to me.
How now sir
Iohn
? What are you brauling here? Doth this become your place, your time, and businesse? You should haue bene well on your way to Yorke. Stand from him Fellow; wherefore hang'st vpon him?
Oh my most worshipfull Lord, and't please your Grace, I am a poore widdow of Eastcheap, and he is arre- sted at my suit.
For what summe?
It is more then for some (my Lord) it is for all: all I haue, he hath eaten me out of house and home; hee hath put all my substance into that fat belly of his: but I will haue some of it out againe, or I will ride thee
o
' Nights, like the Mare.
I thinke I am as like to ride the Mare, if I haue any vantage of ground, to get vp.
How comes this, Sir
Iohn
? Fy, what a man of good temper would endure this tempest of exclamation? Are you not asham'd to inforce a poore Widdowe to so rough a course, to come by her owne?
What is the grosse summe that I owe thee?
Marry (if thou wer't an honest man) thy selfe, & the mony too. Thou didst sweare to mee vpon a parcell gilt Goblet, sitting in my Dolphin-chamber at the round table, by a sea-cole fire, on Wednesday in Whitson week, when the Prince broke thy head for lik'ning him to a sin- ging man of Windsor; Thou didst sweare to me then (as I was washing thy wound) to marry me, and make mee my Lady thy wife. Canst
deny it? Did not goodwife
Keech
the Butchers wife come in then, and cal me gossip
Quick-ly
? comming in to borrow a messe of Vinegar: telling vs, she had a good dish of Prawnes: whereby
didst desire to eat some: whereby I told thee they were
ill
for a greene wound? And didst not thou (when she was gone downe staires) desire me to be no more familiar with such poore people, saying, that ere long they should call me Madam? And did'st
not kisse me, and bid mee fetch thee 30.
s
? I put thee now to thy Book-oath, deny it if thou canst?
My Lord, this is a poore mad soule: and she sayes vp & downe the town, that her eldest son is like you. She hath bin in good case, & the truth is, pouerty hath distra- cted her: but for these foolish Officers, I beseech you, I may haue redresse against them.
Sir
Iohn,
sir
Iohn,
I am well acquainted with your maner of wrenching the true cause, the false way. It is not a confident brow, nor the throng of wordes, that come with such (more then impudent) sawcines from you, can thrust me from a leuell consideration, I know you
ha
' pra-ctis'd vpon the easie-yeelding spirit of this woman.
Yes in troth my Lord.
Prethee peace: pay her the debt you owe her, and vnpay the villany you haue done her: the one you may do with sterling mony, & the other with currant repentance.
My Lord, I will not vndergo this sneape without reply. You call honorable Boldnes, impudent Sawcinesse: If a man wil curt'sie, and say nothing, he is vertuous: No, my Lord (your humble duty reme[m]bred) I will not be your sutor. I say to you, I desire deliu'rance from these Officers being vpon hasty employment in the Kings Affaires.
You speake, as hauing power to do wrong: But answer in the effect of your Reputation, and satisfie the poore woman.
Come hither Hostesse.
Enter M[aster]. Gower
Now Master
Gower;
What newes?
The King (my Lord) and
Henrie
Prince of Wales Are neere at hand: The rest the Paper telles.
As I am a Gentleman.
Nay, you said so before.
As I am a Gentleman. Come, no more words of it
By this Heauenly ground I tread on, I must be faine to pawne both my Plate, and the Tapistry of my dy- ning Chambers.
Glasses, glasses, is the onely drinking: and for thy walles a pretty slight Drollery, or the Storie of the Prodigall, or the Germane hunting in Waterworke, is worth a thousand of these Bed-hangings, and these Fly- bitten Tapistries. Let it be tenne pound (if thou canst.) Come, if it were not for thy humors, there is not a better Wench in England. Go, wash thy face, and draw thy Action: Come, thou must not bee in this humour with me, come, I know thou was't set on to this.
Prethee (Sir
Iohn
) let it be but twenty Nobles, I loath to pawne my Plate, in good earnest la.
Let it alone, Ile make other shift: you'l be a fool still.
Well, you shall haue it although I pawne my Gowne. I hope you'l come to Supper: You'l pay me al- together?
Will I liue? Go with her, with her: hooke-on, hooke-on.
Will you haue
Doll Teare-sheet
meet you at sup- per?
No more words. Let's haue her.
I haue heard bitter newes.
What's the newes (my good Lord?)
Where lay the King last night?
At Basingstoke my Lord.
I hope (my Lord) all's well. What is the newes my Lord?
Come all his Forces backe?
No: Fifteene hundred Foot, fiue hundred Horse Are march'd vp to my Lord of Lancaster, Against Northumberland, and the Archbishop.
Comes the King backe from Wales, my noble L[ord]?
You shall haue Letters of me presently. Come, go along with me, good M[aster].
Gowre.
My Lord.
What's the matter?
Master
Gowre,
shall I entreate you with mee to dinner?
I must waite vpon my good Lord heere. I thanke you, good Sir
Iohn.
Sir
Iohn,
you loyter heere too long being you are to take Souldiers vp, in Countries as you go.
Will you sup with me, Master
Gowre
?
What foolish Master taught you these man- ners, Sir
Iohn
?
Master
Gower,
if they become mee not, hee was a Foole that taught them mee. This is the right Fencing grace (my Lord) tap for tap, and so part faire.
Now the Lord lighten thee, thou art a great Foole.
Exeunt
Scena Secunda.
Enter Prince Henry, Pointz, Bardolfe, and Page.
Trust me, I am exceeding weary.
Is it come to that? I had thought wearines durst not haue attach'd one of so high blood.
It doth me: though it discolours the complexion of my Greatnesse to acknowledge it. Doth it not shew vildely in me, to desire small Beere?
Why, a Prince should not be so loosely studied, as to remember so weake a Composition.
Belike then, my Appetite was not Princely got: for (in troth) I do now remember the poore Crea- ture, Small Beere. But indeede these humble considera- tions make me out of loue with my Greatnesse. What a disgrace is it to me, to remember thy name? Or to know thy face to morrow? Or to take note how many paire of Silk stockings
hast? (Viz. these, and those that were thy peach-colour'd ones:) Or to beare the Inuentorie of thy shirts, as one for superfluity, and one other, for vse. But that the Tennis-Court-keeper knowes better then I, for it is a low ebbe of Linnen with thee, when thou kept'st not Racket there, as thou hast not done a great while, be- cause the rest of thy Low Countries, haue made a shift to eate vp thy Holland.
How
ill
it followes, after you haue labour'd so hard, you should talke so idlely? Tell me how many good yong Princes would do so, their Fathers lying so sicke, as yours is?
Shall I tell thee one thing,
Pointz
?
Yes: and let it be an excellent good thing.
It shall serue among wittes of no higher breed- ing then thine.
Go to: I stand the push of your one thing, that you'l tell.
Why, I tell thee, it is not meet, that I should be sad now my Father is sicke: albeit I could tell to thee (as to one it pleases me, for fault of a better, to call my friend) I could be sad, and sad indeed too.
Very hardly, vpon such a subiect.
Thou think'st me as farre in the Diuels Booke, as thou, and
Falstaffe,
for obduracie and persistencie. Let the end try the man. But I tell thee, my hart bleeds inward- ly, that my Father is so sicke: and keeping such vild com- pany as thou art, hath in reason taken from me, all osten- tation of sorrow.
The reason?
What would'st thou think of me, if I shold weep?
I would thinke thee a most Princely hypocrite.
It would be euery mans thought: and thou art a blessed Fellow, to thinke as euery man thinkes: neuer a mans thought in the world, keepes the Rode-way better then thine: euery man would thinke me an Hypocrite in- deede. And what accites your most worshipful thought to thinke so?
Why, because you haue beene so lewde, and so much ingraffed to
Falstaffe.
And to thee.
Nay, I am well spoken of, I can heare it with mine owne eares: the worst that they can say of me is, that I am a second Brother, and that I am a proper Fellowe of my hands: and those two things I confesse I canot helpe. Looke, looke, here comes
Bardolfe.
And the Boy that I gaue
Falstaffe,
he had him from me Christian, and see if the fat villain haue not trans-form'd him Ape.
Enter Bardolfe.
Saue your Grace.
And yours, most Noble
Bardolfe.
Come you pernitious Asse, you bashfull Foole, must you be blushing? Wherefore blush you now? what a Maidenly man at Armes are you become? Is it such a matter to get a Pottle-pots Maiden-head?
He call'd me euen now (my Lord) through a red Lattice, and I could discerne no part of his face from the window: at last I spy'd his eyes, and me thought he had made two holes in the Ale-wiues new Petticoat, & pee- ped through.
Hath not the boy profited?
Away, you horson vpright Rabbet, away.
Away, you rascally
Altheas
dreame, away.
Instruct vs Boy: what dreame, Boy?
Marry (my Lord)
Althea
dream'd, she was de-liuer'd of a Firebrand, and therefore I call him hir dream.
A Crownes-worth of good Interpretation: There it is, Boy.
O that this good Blossome could bee kept from Cankers: Well, there is six pence to preserue thee.
If you do not make him be hang'd among you, the gallowes shall be wrong'd.
And how doth thy Master,
Bardolph
?
Well, my good Lord: he heard of your Graces comming to Towne. There's a Letter for you.
Deliuer'd with good respect: And how doth the Martlemas, your Master?
In bodily health Sir.
Marry, the immortall part needes a Physitian: but that moues not him: though that bee sicke, it dyes not.
I do allow this Wen to bee as familiar with me, as my dogge: and he holds his place, for looke you he writes.
Letter.
Iohn Falstaffe Knight:
(Euery man must know that, as oft as hee hath occasion to name himselfe:) Euen like those that are kinne to the King, for they neuer pricke their finger, but they say, there is som of the kings blood spilt. How comes that (sayes he) that takes vpon him not to conceiue? the answer is as ready as a borrow- ed cap: I am the Kings poore Cosin, Sir.
Nay, they will be kin to vs, but they wil fetch it from
Iaphet.
But to the Letter: ——
Sir Iohn Falstaffe,
Knight, to the Sonne of the King, neerest his Father, Harrie Prince of Wales, greeting.
Why this is a Certificate.
Peace.
I will imitate the honourable Romaines in breuitie.
Sure he meanes breuity in breath: short-winded.
I commend me to thee, I commend thee, and I leaue thee. Bee
not too familiar with
Pointz,
for hee misuses thy Fauours so
much, that he sweares thou art to marrie his Sister
Nell.
Re- pent at idle times as thou mayst, and so farewell. Thine, by yea and no: which is as much as to say, as thou vsest him.
Iacke Falstaffe
with my Familiars:
Iohn
with my Brothers and Sister: & Sir
Iohn,
with all Europe.
My Lord, I will steepe this Letter in Sack, and make him eate it.
That's to make him eate twenty of his Words. But do you vse me thus
Ned
? Must I marry your Sister?
May the Wench haue no worse Fortune. But I neuer said so.
Well, thus we play the Fooles with the time, & the spirits of the wise, sit in the clouds, and mocke vs: Is your Master heere in London?
Yes my Lord.
Where suppes he? Doth the old Bore, feede in the old Franke?
At the old place my Lord, in East-cheape.
What Company?
Ephesians my Lord, of the old Church.
Sup any women with him?
None my Lord, but old Mistris
Quickly,
and M[istris].
Doll Teare-sheet.
What Pagan may that be?
A proper Gentlewoman, Sir, and a Kinswoman of my Masters.
Euen such Kin, as the Parish Heyfors are to the Towne-Bull? Shall we steale vpon them (
Ned
) at Supper?
I am your shadow, my Lord, Ile follow you.
Sirrah, you boy, and
Bardolph,
no word to your Master that I am yet in Towne. There's for your silence.
I haue no tongue, sir.
And for mine Sir, I will gouerne it.
Fare ye well: go. This
Doll Teare-sheet
should be some Rode.
I warrant you, as common as the way betweene S[aint]. Albans, and London.
How might we see
Falstaffe
bestow himselfe to night, in his true colours, and not our selues be seene?
Put on two Leather Ierkins, and Aprons, and waite vpon him at his Table, like Drawers.
From a God, to a Bull? A heauie declension: It was Ioues case. From a Prince, to a Prentice, a low trans- formation, that shall be mine: for in euery thing, the pur- pose must weigh with the folly. Follow me
Ned.
Exeunt
Scena Tertia.
Enter Northumberland, his Ladie, and Harrie Percies Ladie.
I prethee louing Wife, and gentle Daughter, Giue an euen way vnto my rough Affaires: Put not you on the visage of the Times, And be like them to Percie, troublesome.
I haue giuen ouer, I will speak no more, Do what you will: your Wisedome, be your guide.
Alas (sweet Wife) my Honor is at pawne, And but my going, nothing can redeeme it.
Oh yet, for heauens sake, go not to these Warrs; The Time was (Father) when you broke your word, When you were more endeer'd to it, then now, When your owne Percy, when my heart-deere-
Harry
,
Threw many a Northward looke, to see his Father Bring vp his Powres: but he did long in vaine. Who then perswaded you to stay at home? There were two Honors lost; Yours, and your Sonnes. For Yours, may heauenly glory brighten it: For His, it stucke vpon him, as the Sunne In the gray vault of Heauen: and by his Light Did all the Cheualrie of England moue To do braue Acts. He was (indeed) the Glasse Wherein the Noble-Youth did dresse themselues. He had no Legges, that practic'd not his Gate: And speaking thicke (which Nature made his blemish) Became the Accents of the Valiant. For those that could speake low, and tardily, Would turne their owne Perfection, to Abuse, To seeme like him. So that in Speech, in Gate, In Diet, in Affections of delight, In Militarie Rules, Humors of Blood,
He was the Marke, and Glasse, Coppy, and Booke, That fashion'd others. And him, O wondrous! him, O Miracle of Men! Him did you leaue (Second to none) vn-seconded by you, To looke vpon the hideous God of Warre, In dis-aduantage, to abide a field, Where nothing but the sound of
Hotspurs
Name Did seeme defensible: so you left him. Neuer, O neuer doe his Ghost the wrong, To hold your Honor more precise and nice With others, then with him. Let them alone: The Marshall and the Arch-bishop are strong. Had my sweet
Harry
had but halfe their Numbers, To day might I (hanging on
Hotspurs
Necke) Haue talk'd of
Monmouth's
Graue.
Beshrew your heart, (Faire Daughter) you doe draw my Spirits from me, With new lamenting ancient Ouer-sights. But I must goe, and meet with Danger there, Or it will seeke me in another place, And finde me worse prouided.
O flye to Scotland, Till that the Nobles, and the armed Commons, Haue of their Puissance made a little taste.
If they get ground, and vantage of the King, Then ioyne you with them, like a Ribbe of Steele, To make Strength stronger. But, for all our loues, First let them trye themselues. So did your Sonne, He was so suffer'd; so came I a Widow: And neuer shall haue length of Life enough, To raine vpon Remembrance with mine Eyes, That it may grow, and sprowt, as high as Heauen, For Recordation to my Noble Husband.
Come, come, go in with me: 'tis with my Minde As with the Tyde, swell'd vp vnto his height, That makes a still-stand, running neyther way. Faine would I goe to meet the Arch-bishop, But many thousand Reasons hold me backe. I will resolue for Scotland: there am I, Till Time and Vantage craue my company.
Exeunt.
Scaena Quarta.
Enter two Drawers.
What hast thou brought there? Apple-Iohns? Thou know'st Sir
Iohn
cannot endure an Apple-Iohn.
Thou say'st true: the Prince once set a Dish of Apple-Iohns before him, and told him there were fiue more Sir
Iohns:
and, putting off his Hat, said, I will now take my leaue of these sixe drie, round, old-wither'd Knights. It anger'd him to the heart: but hee hath for- got that.
Why then couer, and set them downe: and see if thou canst finde out
Sneakes
Noyse; Mistris
Teare-sheet
would faine haue some Musique.
Sirrha, heere will be the Prince, and Master
Points,
anon: and they will put on two of our Ierkins, and Aprons, and Sir
Iohn
must not know of it:
Bardolph
hath brought word.
Then here will be old
Vtis:
it will be an ex- cellent stratagem.
Ile see if I can finde out
Sneake.
Exit.
Enter Hostesse, and Dol.
Sweet-heart, me thinkes now you are in an ex- cellent good temperalitie: your Pulsidge beates as ex- traordinarily, as heart would desire; and your Colour (I warrant you) is as red as any Rose: But you haue drunke too much Canaries, and that's a maruellous sear- ching Wine; and it perfumes the blood, ere wee can say what's this. How doe you now?
Better then I was: Hem.
Why that was well said: A good heart's worth Gold. Looke, here comes Sir
Iohn.
Enter Falstaffe.
When Arthur first in Court
—— (emptie the Iordan)
and was a worthy King:
How now Mistris
Dol
?
Sick of a Calme: yea, good-sooth.
So is all her Sect: if they be once in a Calme, they are sick.
You muddie Rascall, is that all the comfort you giue me?
You make fat Rascalls, Mistris
Dol.
I make them? Gluttonie and Diseases make them, I make them not.
If the Cooke make the Gluttonie, you helpe to make the Diseases (
Dol
) we catch of you (
Dol
) we catch of you: Grant that, my poore Vertue, grant that.
I
marry, our Chaynes, and our Iewels.
Your Brooches, Pearles, and Owches: For to serue brauely, is to come halting off: you know, to come off the Breach, with his Pike bent brauely, and to Surge- rie brauely; to venture vpon the charg'd-Chambers brauely.
Why this is the olde fashion: you two neuer meete, but you fall to some discord: you are both (in good troth) as Rheumatike as two drie Tostes, you can- not one beare with anothers Confirmities. What the good-yere? One must beare, and that must bee you: you are the weaker Vessell; as they say, the emptier Vessell.
Can a weake emptie Vessell beare such a huge full Hogs-head? There's a whole Marchants Venture of Burdeux-Stuffe in him: you haue not seene a Hulke better stufft in the Hold. Come, Ile be friends with thee
Iacke:
Thou art going to the Warres, and whether I shall euer see thee againe, or no, there is no body cares.
Enter Drawer.
Sir, Ancient
Pistoll
is below, and would speake with you.
Hang him, swaggering Rascall, let him not come hither: it is the foule-mouth'dst Rogue in Eng- land.
If hee swagger, let him not come here: I must liue amongst my Neighbors, Ile no Swaggerers: I am in good name, and fame, with the very best: shut the doore, there comes no Swaggerers heere: I haue not liu'd all this while, to haue swaggering now: shut the doore, I pray you.
Do'st thou heare, Hostesse?
'Pray you pacifie your selfe (Sir
Iohn
) there comes no Swaggerers heere.
Do'st thou heare? it is mine Ancient.
Tilly-fally (Sir
Iohn
) neuer tell me, your ancient Swaggerer comes not in my doores. I was before Master
Tisick
the Deputie, the other day: and as hee said to me, it was no longer agoe then Wednesday last: Neighbour
Quickly
(sayes hee;) Master
Dombe,
our Minister, was by then: Neighbour
Quickly
(sayes hee) receiue those that are Ciuill; for (sayth hee) you are in an
ill
Name: now hee said so, I can tell whereupon: for (sayes hee) you are an honest Woman, and well thought on; therefore take heede what Guests you receiue: Receiue (sayes hee) no swaggering Companions. There comes none heere. You would blesse you to heare what hee said. No, Ile no Swaggerers.
Hee's no Swaggerer (Hostesse:) a tame Cheater, hee: you may stroake him as gently, as a Puppie Grey- hound: hee will not swagger with a Barbarie Henne, if her feathers turne backe in any shew of resistance. Call him vp (Drawer.)
Cheater, call you him? I will barre no honest man my house, nor no Cheater: but I doe not loue swag- gering; I am the worse when one sayes, swagger: Feele Masters, how I shake: looke you, I warrant you.
So you doe, Hostesse.
Doe I? yea, in very truth doe I, if it were an As- pen Leafe: I cannot abide Swaggerers.
Enter Pistol, and Bardolph and his Boy.
'Saue you, Sir
Iohn.
Welcome Ancient
Pistol.
Here (
Pistol
) I charge you with a Cup of Sacke: doe you discharge vpon mine Hostesse.
I will discharge vpon her (Sir
Iohn
) with two Bullets.
She is Pistoll-proofe (Sir) you shall hardly of- fend her.
Come, Ile drinke no Proofes, nor no Bullets: I will drinke no more then will doe me good, for no mans pleasure, I.
Then to you (Mistris
Dorothie
) I will charge you.
Charge me? I scorne you (scuruie Companion) what? you poore, base, rascally, cheating, lacke-Linnen-Mate: away you mouldie Rogue, away; I am meat for your Master.
I know you, Mistris
Dorothie.
Away you Cut-purse Rascall, you filthy Bung, away: By this Wine, Ile thrust my Knife in your mouldie Chappes, if you play the sawcie Cuttle with me. Away you Bottle-Ale Rascall, you Basket-hilt stale Iugler, you. Since when, I pray you, Sir? what, with two Points on your shoulder? much.
I will murther your Ruffe, for this.
No, good Captaine
Pistol:
not heere, sweete Captaine.
Captaine? thou abhominable damn'd Cheater, art thou not asham'd to be call'd Captaine? If Captaines were of my minde, they would trunchion you out, for ta- king their Names vpon you, before you haue earn'd them. You a Captaine? you slaue, for what? for tearing a poore Whores Ruffe in a Bawdy-house? Hee a Captaine? hang him Rogue, hee liues vpon mouldie stew'd-Pruines, and dry'de Cakes. A Captaine? These Villaines will make the word Captaine odious: Therefore Captaines had neede looke to it.
'Pray thee goe downe, good Ancient.
Hearke thee hither, Mistris
Dol.
Not I: I tell thee what, Corporall
Bardolph,
I could teare her: Ile be reueng'd on her.
'Pray thee goe downe.
Ile see her damn'd first: to
Pluto's
damn'd Lake, to the Infernall Deepe, where
Erebus
and Tortures vilde also. Hold Hooke and Line, say I: Downe: downe Dogges, downe Fates: haue wee not
Hiren
here?
Good Captaine
Peesel
be quiet, it is very late: I beseeke you now, aggrauate your Choler.
These be good Humors indeede. Shall Pack-Horses, and hollow-pamper'd Iades of Asia, which can- not goe but thirtie miles a day, compare with
Caesar,
and with Caniballs, and Troian Greekes? nay, rather damne them with King
Cerberus,
and let the Welkin roare: shall wee fall foule for Toyes?
By my troth Captaine, these are very bitter words.
Be gone, good Ancient: this will grow to a Brawle anon.
Die men, like Dogges; giue Crownes like Pinnes: Haue we not
Hiren
here?
On my word (Captaine) there's none such here. What the good-yere, doe you thinke I would denye her? I pray be quiet.
Then feed, and be fat (my faire
Calipolis.
) Come, giue me some Sack,
Si fortune me tormente, sperato me con-tente.
Feare wee broad-sides? No, let the Fiend giue fire: Giue me some Sack: and Sweet-heart lye thou there: Come wee to full Points here, and are
et cetera's
no- thing?
Pistol,
I would be quiet.
Sweet Knight, I kisse thy Neaffe: what? wee haue seene the seuen Starres.
Thrust him downe stayres, I cannot endure such a Fustian Rascall.
Thrust him downe stayres? know we not Gallo- way Nagges?
Quoit him downe (
Bardolph
) like a shoue-groat shilling: nay, if hee doe nothing but speake nothing, hee shall be nothing here.
Come, get you downe stayres.
What? shall wee haue Incision? shall wee em- brew? then Death rocke me asleepe, abridge my dolefull dayes: why then let grieuous, gastly, gaping Wounds, vntwin'd the Sisters three: Come
Atropos,
I say.
Here's good stuffe toward.
Giue me my Rapier, Boy.
I prethee
Iack,
I prethee doe not draw.
Get you downe stayres.
Here's a goodly tumult: Ile forsweare keeping house, before Ile be in these tirrits, and frights. So: Mur- ther I warrant now. Alas, alas, put vp your naked Wea- pons, put vp your naked Weapons.
I prethee
Iack
be quiet, the Rascall is gone: ah, you whorson little valiant Villaine, you.
Are you not hurt i'th' Groyne? me thought hee made a shrewd Thrust at your Belly.
Haue you turn'd him out of doores?
Yes Sir: the Rascall's drunke: you haue hurt him (Sir) in the shoulder.
A Rascall to braue me.
Ah, you sweet little Rogue, you: alas, poore Ape, how thou sweat'st? Come, let me wipe thy Face: Come on, you whorson Chops: Ah Rogue, I loue thee: Thou art as valorous as
Hector
of Troy, worth fiue of
Agamem-non,
and tenne times better then the nine Worthies: ah Villaine.
A rascally Slaue, I will tosse the Rogue in a Blan- ket.
Doe, if thou dar'st for thy heart: if thou doo'st, Ile canuas thee betweene a paire of Sheetes.
Enter Musique.
The Musique is come, Sir.
Let them play: play Sirs. Sit on my Knee,
Dol.
A Rascall, bragging Slaue: the Rogue fled from me like Quick-siluer.
And thou followd'st him like a Church: thou whorson little tydie Bartholmew Bore-pigge, when wilt thou leaue fighting on dayes, and foyning on nights, and begin to patch vp thine old Body for Heauen?
Enter the Prince and Poines disguis'd.
Peace (good
Dol
) doe not speake like a Deaths- head: doe not bid me remember mine end.
Sirrha, what humor is the Prince of?
A good shallow young fellow: hee would haue made a good Pantler, hee would haue chipp'd Bread well.
They say
Poines
hath a good Wit.
Hee a good Wit? hang him Baboone, his Wit is as thicke as Tewksburie Mustard: there is no more con- ceit in him, then is in a Mallet.
Why doth the Prince loue him so then?
Because their Legges are both of a bignesse: and hee playes at Quoits well, and eates Conger and Fennell, and drinkes off Candles ends for Flap-dragons, and rides the wilde-Mare with the Boyes, and iumpes vpon Ioyn'd- stooles, and sweares with a good grace, and weares his Boot very smooth, like vnto the Signe of the Legge; and breedes no bate with telling of discreete stories: and such other Gamboll Faculties hee hath, that shew a weake Minde, and an able Body, for the which the Prince admits him; for the Prince himselfe is such another: the weight of an hayre will turne the Scales betweene their
Haber-de-pois.
Would not this Naue of a Wheele haue his Eares cut off?
Let vs beat him before his Whore.
Looke, if the wither'd Elder hath not his Poll claw'd like a Parrot.
Is it not strange, that Desire should so many yeeres out-liue performance?
Kisse me
Dol.
Saturne
and
Venus
this yeere in Coniunction? What sayes the Almanack to that?
And looke whether the fierie
Trigon,
his Man, be not lisping to his Masters old Tables, his Note-Booke, his Councell-keeper?
Thou do'st giue me flatt'ring Busses.
Nay truely, I kisse thee with a most constant heart.
I am olde, I am olde.
I loue thee better, then I loue ere a scuruie young Boy of them all.
What Stuffe wilt thou haue a Kirtle of? I shall receiue Money on Thursday: thou shalt haue a Cappe to morrow. A merrie Song, come: it growes late, wee will to Bed. Thou wilt forget me, when I am gone.
Thou wilt set me
a
weeping, if thou say'st so: proue that euer I dresse my selfe handsome, till thy re- turne: well, hearken the end.
Some Sack,
Francis.
Anon, anon, Sir.
Ha? a Bastard Sonne of the Kings? And art not thou
Poines,
his Brother?
Why thou Globe of sinfull Continents, what a life do'st thou lead?
A better then thou: I am a Gentleman, thou art a Drawer.
Very true, Sir: and I come to draw you out by the Eares.
Oh, the Lord preserue thy good Grace: Wel- come to London. Now Heauen blesse that sweete Face of thine: what, are you come from Wales?
Thou whorson mad Compound of Maiestie: by this light Flesh, and corrupt Blood, thou art welcome.
How? you fat Foole, I scorne you.
My Lord, hee will driue you out of your re- uenge, and turne all to a merryment, if you take not the heat.
You whorson Candle-myne you, how vildly did you speake of me euen now, before this honest, ver- tuous, ciuill Gentlewoman?
'Blessing on your good heart, and so shee is by my troth.
Didst thou heare me?
Yes: and you knew me, as you did when you ranne away by Gads-hill: you knew I was at your back, and spoke it on purpose, to trie my patience.
No, no, no: not so: I did not thinke, thou wast within hearing.
I shall driue you then to confesse the wilfull abuse, and then I know how to handle you.
No abuse (
Hall
) on mine Honor, no abuse.
Not to disprayse me? and call me Pantler, and Bread-chopper, and I know not what?
No abuse (
Hal.
)
No abuse?
No abuse (
Ned
) in the World: honest
Ned
none. I disprays'd him before the Wicked, that the Wicked might not fall in loue with him: In which doing, I haue done the part of a carefull Friend, and a true Subiect, and thy Father is to giue me thankes for it. No abuse (
Hal:
) none (
Ned
) none; no Boyes, none.
See now whether pure Feare, and entire Cow- ardise, doth not make thee wrong this vertuous Gentle- woman, to close with vs? Is shee of the Wicked? Is thine Hostesse heere, of the Wicked? Or is the Boy of the Wicked? Or honest
Bardolph
(whose Zeale burnes in his Nose) of the Wicked?
Answere thou dead Elme, answere.
The Fiend hath prickt downe
Bardolph
irrecoue- rable, and his Face is
Lucifers
Priuy-Kitchin, where hee doth nothing but rost Mault-Wormes: for the Boy, there is a good Angell about him, but the Deuill out- bids him too.
For the Women?
For one of them, shee is in
Hell
alreadie, and burnes poore Soules: for the other, I owe her Mo- ney; and whether shee bee damn'd for that, I know not.
No, I warrant you.
No, I thinke thou art not: I thinke thou art quit for that. Marry, there is another Indictment vpon thee, for suffering flesh to bee eaten in thy house, contrary to the Law, for the which I thinke thou wilt howle.
All Victuallers doe so: What is a Ioynt of Mutton, or two, in a whole Lent?
You, Gentlewoman.
What sayes your Grace?
His Grace sayes that, which his flesh rebells against.
Who knocks so lowd at doore? Looke to the doore there,
Francis
?
Enter Peto.
Peto,
how now? what newes?
The King, your Father, is at Westminster, And there are twentie weake and wearied Postes, Come from the North: and as I came along, I met, and ouer-tooke a dozen Captaines, Bare-headed, sweating, knocking at the Tauernes, And asking euery one for Sir
Iohn Falstaffe.
By Heauen (
Poines
) I feele me much to blame, So idly to prophane the precious time, When Tempest of Commotion, like the South, Borne with black Vapour, doth begin to melt, And drop vpon our bare vnarmed heads. Giue me my Sword, and Cloake:
Falstaffe,
good night.
Exit.
Now comes in the sweetest Morsell of the night, and wee must hence, and leaue it vnpickt. More knocking at the doore? How now? what's the mat- ter?
You must away to Court, Sir, presently, A dozen Captaines stay at doore for you.
Pay the Musitians, Sirrha: farewell Hostesse, farewell
Dol.
You see (my good Wenches) how men of Merit are sought after: the vndeseruer may sleepe, when the man of Action is call'd on. Farewell good Wenches: if I be not sent away poste, I will see you againe, ere I goe.
I cannot speake: if my heart bee not readie to burst—— Well (sweete
Iacke
) haue a care of thy selfe.
Farewell, farewell.
Exit.
Well, fare thee well: I haue knowne thee these twentie nine yeeres, come Pescod-time: but an honester, and truer-hearted man—— Well, fare thee well.
Mistris
Teare-sheet.
What's the matter?
Bid Mistris
Teare-sheet
come to my Master.
Oh runne
Dol,
runne: runne, good
Dol.
Exeunt.
Actus Tertius. Scena Prima.
Enter the King, with a Page.
Goe, call the Earles of Surrey, and of Warwick: But ere they come, bid them ore-reade these Letters, And well consider of them: make good speed.
Exit.
How many thousand of my poorest Subiects Are at this howre asleepe? O Sleepe, O gentle Sleepe, Natures soft Nurse, how haue I frighted thee, That thou no more wilt weigh my eye-lids downe, And steepe my Sences in Forgetfulnesse? Why rather (Sleepe) lyest thou in smoakie Cribs, Vpon vneasie Pallads stretching thee, And huisht with bussing Night, flyes to thy slumber, Then in the perfum'd Chambers of the Great? Vnder the Canopies of costly State, And lull'd with sounds of sweetest Melodie? O thou dull God, why lyest thou with the vilde, In loathsome Beds, and leau'st the Kingly Couch, A Watch-case, or a common Larum-Bell? Wilt thou, vpon the high and giddie Mast, Seale vp the Ship-boyes Eyes, and rock his Braines, In Cradle of the rude imperious Surge, And in the visitation of the Windes, Who take the Ruffian Billowes by the top, Curling their monstrous heads, and hanging them With deaff'ning Clamors in the slipp'ry Clouds, That with the hurley, Death it selfe awakes? Canst thou (O partiall Sleepe) giue thy Repose To the wet Sea-Boy, in an houre so rude: And in the calmest, and most stillest Night, With all appliances, and meanes to boote, Deny it to a King? Then happy Lowe, lye downe, Vneasie lyes the Head, that weares a Crowne.
Enter Warwicke and Surrey.
Many good-morrowes to your Maiestie.
Is it good-morrow, Lords?
'Tis One
a
Clock, and past.
Why then good-morrow to you all (my Lords:) Haue you read o're the Letters that I sent you?
We haue (my Liege.)
Then you perceiue the Body of our Kingdome, How foule it is: what ranke Diseases grow, And with what danger, neere the Heart of it?
It is but as a Body, yet distemper'd, Which to his former strength may be restor'd, With good aduice, and little Medicine: My Lord
Northumberland
will soone be cool'd.
Oh Heauen, that one might read the Book of Fate, And see the reuolution of the Times Make Mountaines leuell, and the Continent (Wearie of solide firmenesse) melt it selfe Into the Sea: and other Times, to see The beachie Girdle of the Ocean Too wide for
Neptunes
hippes; how Chances mocks And Changes fill the Cuppe of Alteration With diuers Liquors. 'Tis not tenne yeeres gone, Since
Richard,
and
Northumberland,
great friends, Did feast together; and in two yeeres after, Were they at Warres. It is but eight yeeres since, This
Percie
was the man, neerest my Soule, Who, like a Brother, toyl'd in my Affaires, And layd his Loue and Life vnder my foot: Yea, for my sake, euen to the eyes of
Richard
Gaue him defiance. But which of you was by (You Cousin
Neuil,
as I may remember) When
Richard,
with his Eye, brim-full of Teares, (Then check'd, and rated by
Northumberland
) Did speake these words (now prou'd a Prophecie:)
Northumberland,
thou Ladder, by the which My Cousin
Bullingbrooke
ascends my Throne: (Though then, Heauen knowes, I had no such intent, But that necessitie so bow'd the State, That I and Greatnesse were compell'd to kisse:) The Time shall come (thus did hee follow it) The Time will come, that foule Sinne gathering head, Shall breake into Corruption: so went on, Fore-telling this same Times Condition, And the diuision of our Amitie.
There is a Historie in all mens Liues, Figuring the nature of the Times deceas'd: The which obseru'd, a man may prophecie With a neere ayme, of the maine chance of things, As yet not come to Life, which in their Seedes And weake beginnings lye entreasured: Such things become the Hatch and Brood of Time; And by the necessarie forme of this, King
Richard
might create a perfect guesse, That great
Northumberland,
then false to him, Would of that Seed, grow to a greater falsenesse, Which should not finde a ground to roote vpon, Vnlesse on you.
Are these things then Necessities? Then let vs meete them like Necessities; And that same word, euen now cryes out on vs: They say, the Bishop and
Northumberland
Are fiftie thousand strong.
It cannot be (my Lord:) Rumor doth double, like the Voice, and Eccho, The numbers of the feared. Please it your Grace To goe to bed, vpon my Life (my Lord) The Pow'rs that you alreadie haue sent forth, Shall bring this Prize in very easily. To comfort you the more, I haue receiu'd A certaine instance, that
Glendour
is dead. Your Maiestie hath beene this fort-night
ill
, And these vnseason'd howres perforce must adde Vnto your Sicknesse.
I will take your counsaile: And were these inward Warres once out of hand, Wee would (deare Lords) vnto the Holy-Land.
Exeunt.
Scena Secunda.
Enter Shallow and Silence: with Mouldie, Shadow, Wart, Feeble, Bull-calfe.
Come-on, come-on, come-on: giue mee your Hand, Sir; giue mee your Hand, Sir: an early stirrer, by the Rood. And how doth my good Cousin
Silence
?
Good-morrow, good Cousin
Shallow.
And how doth my Cousin, your Bed-fellow? and your fairest Daughter, and mine, my God-Daughter
Ellen
?
Alas, a blacke Ouzell (Cousin
Shallow.
)
By yea and nay, Sir. I dare say my Cousin
William
is become a good Scholler? hee is at Oxford still, is hee not?
Indeede Sir, to my cost.
Hee must then to the Innes of Court shortly: I was once of
Clements
Inne; where (I thinke) they will talke of mad
Shallow
yet.
You were call'd lustie
Shallow
then (Cousin.)
I was call'd any thing: and I would haue done any thing indeede too, and roundly too. There was I, and little
Iohn Doit
of Staffordshire, and blacke
George Bare,
and
Francis Pick-bone,
and
Will Squele
a Cot-sal-man, you had not foure such Swindge-bucklers in all the Innes of Court againe: And I may say to you, wee knew where the
Bona-Roba's
were, and had the best of them all at commandement. Then was
Iacke Falstaffe
(now Sir
Iohn
) a Boy, and Page to
Thomas Mowbray,
Duke of Nor- folke.
This Sir
Iohn
(Cousin) that comes hither anon a- bout Souldiers?
The same Sir
Iohn,
the very same: I saw him breake
Scoggan's
Head at the Court-Gate, when hee was a Crack, not thus high: and the very same day did I fight with one
Sampson Stock-fish,
a Fruiterer, behinde Greyes-Inne. Oh the mad dayes that I haue spent! and to see how many of mine olde Acquaintance are dead?
Wee shall all follow (Cousin.)
Certaine: 'tis certaine: very sure, very sure: Death is certaine to all, all shall dye. How a good Yoke of Bullocks at Stamford Fayre?
Truly Cousin, I was not there.
Death is certaine. Is old
Double
of your Towne liuing yet?
Dead, Sir.
Dead? See, see: hee drew a good Bow: and dead? hee shot a fine shoote.
Iohn
of Gaunt loued him well, and betted much Money on his head. Dead? hee would haue clapt in the Clowt at Twelue-score, and carryed you a fore-hand Shaft at foureteene, and foure- teene and a halfe, that it would haue done a mans heart good to see. How a score of Ewes now?
Thereafter as they be: a score of good Ewes may be worth tenne pounds.
And is olde
Double
dead?
Enter Bardolph and his Boy.
Heere come two of Sir
Iohn Falstaffes
Men (as I thinke.)
Good-morrow, honest Gentlemen.
I beseech you, which is Iustice
Shallow
?
I am
Robert Shallow
(Sir) a poore Esquire of this Countie, and one of the Kings Iustices of the Peace: What is your good pleasure with me?
My Captaine (Sir) commends him to you: my Captaine, Sir
Iohn Falstaffe:
a tall Gentleman, and a most gallant Leader.
Hee greetes me well: (Sir) I knew him a good Back-Sword-man. How doth the good Knight? may I aske, how my Lady his Wife doth?
Sir, pardon: a Souldier is better accommoda- ted, then with a Wife.
It is well said, Sir; and it is well said, indeede, too: Better accommodated? it is good, yea indeede is it: good phrases are surely, and euery where very com- mendable. Accommodated, it comes of
Accommodo:
very good, a good Phrase.
Pardon, Sir, I haue heard the word. Phrase call you it? by this Day, I know not the Phrase: but I will maintaine the Word with my Sword, to bee a Souldier-like Word, and a Word of exceeding good Command. Accommodated: that is, when a man is (as they say) accommodated: or, when a man is, being
whereby he thought to be accommodated, which is an excellent thing.
Enter Falstaffe.
It is very iust: Looke, heere comes good Sir
Iohn
.
Giue me your hand, giue me your Worships good hand: Trust me, you looke well: and beare your yeares very well. Welcome, good Sir
Iohn.
I am glad to see you well, good M[aster].
Robert Shal-low:
Master
Sure-card
as I thinke?
No sir
Iohn,
it is my Cosin
Silence:
in Commissi- on with mee.
Good M[aster].
Silence,
it well befits you should be of the peace.
Your good Worship is welcome.
Fye, this is hot weather (Gentlemen) haue you prouided me heere halfe a dozen of sufficient men?
Marry haue we sir: Will you sit?
Let me see them, I beseech you.
Where's the Roll? Where's the Roll? Where's the Roll? Let me see, let me see, let me see: so, so, so, so: yea marry Sir.
Raphe Mouldie:
let them appeare as I call: let them do so, let them do so: Let mee see, Where is
Mouldie
?
Heere, if it please you.
What thinke you (Sir
Iohn
) a good limb'd fel- low: yong, strong, and of good friends.
Is thy name
Mouldie
?
Yea, if it please you.
'Tis the more time thou wert vs'd.
Ha, ha, ha, most excellent. Things that are moul- die, lacke vse: very singular good. Well saide Sir
Iohn,
very well said.
Pricke him.
I was prickt well enough before, if you could haue let me alone: my old Dame will be vndone now, for one to doe her Husbandry, and her Drudgery; you need not to haue prickt me, there are other men fitter to goe out, then I.
Go
too
: peace
Mouldie,
you shall goe.
Mouldie,
it is time you were spent.
Spent?
Peace, fellow, peace; stand aside: Know you where you are? For the other sir
Iohn:
Let me see:
Simon Shadow.
I
marry, let me haue him to sit vnder: he's like to be a cold souldier.
Where's
Shadow
?
Heere sir.
Shadow,
whose sonne art thou?
My Mothers sonne, Sir.
Thy Mothers sonne: like enough, and thy Fa- thers shadow: so the sonne of the Female, is the shadow of the Male: it is often so indeede, but not of the Fathers substance.
Do you like him, sir
Iohn
?
Shadow
will serue for Summer: pricke him: For wee haue a number of shadowes to fill vppe the Muster-Booke.
Thomas Wart
?
Where's he?
Heere sir.
Is thy name
Wart
?
Yea sir.
Thou art a very ragged Wart.
Shall I pricke him downe, Sir
Iohn
?
It were superfluous: for his apparrel is built vp- on his backe, and the whole frame stands vpon pins: prick him no more.
Ha, ha, ha, you can do it sir: you can doe it: I commend you well.
Francis Feeble.
Heere sir.
What Trade art thou
Feeble
?
A Womans Taylor sir.
Shall I pricke him, sir?
You may: But if he had beene a mans Taylor, he would haue prick'd you. Wilt thou make as many holes in an enemies Bat- taile, as thou hast done in a Womans petticote?
I will doe my good
will
sir, you can haue no more.
Well said, good Womans Tailour: Well sayde Couragious
Feeble:
thou wilt bee as valiant as the wrath- full Doue, or most magnanimous Mouse. Pricke the wo- mans Taylour well Master
Shallow,
deepe Maister
Shal-low.
I would
Wart
might haue gone sir.
I would thou wert a mans Tailor, that
might'st mend him, and make him fit to goe. I cannot put him to a priuate souldier, that is the Leader of so many thou- sands. Let that suffice, most Forcible
Feeble.
It shall suffice.
I am bound to thee, reuerend
Feeble.
Who is the next?
Peter Bulcalfe
of the Greene.
Yea marry, let vs see
Bulcalfe.
Heere sir.
Trust me, a likely Fellow. Come, pricke me
Bul-calfe
till he roare againe.
Oh, good my Lord Captaine.
What? do'st thou roare before th'art prickt.
Oh sir, I am a diseased man.
What disease hast thou?
A whorson cold sir, a cough sir, which I caught with Ringing in the Kings affayres, vpon his Coronation day, sir.
Come, thou shalt go to the Warres in a Gowne: we will haue away thy Cold, and I will take such order, that thy friends shall ring for thee. Is heere all?
There is two more called then your number: you must haue but foure heere sir, and so I pray you go in with me to dinner.
Come, I will goe drinke with you, but I cannot tarry dinner. I am glad to see you in good troth, Master
Shallow.
O sir
Iohn,
doe you remember since wee lay all night in the Winde-mill, in S[aint]. Georges Field.
No more of that good Master
Shallow:
No more of that.
Ha? it was a merry night. And is
Iane Night-worke
aliue?
She liues, M[aster].
Shallow.
She neuer could away with me.
Neuer, neuer: she would alwayes say shee could not abide M[aster].
Shallow.
I could anger her to the heart: shee was then a
Bona-Roba.
Doth she hold her owne well.
Old, old, M[aster].
Shallow.
Nay, she must be old, she cannot choose but be
old: certaine shee's old: and had
Robin Night-worke,
by old
Night-worke,
before I came to
Clements
Inne.
That's fiftie fiue yeeres agoe.
Hah, Cousin
Silence,
that thou hadst seene that, that this Knight and I haue seene: hah, Sir
Iohn,
said I well?
Wee haue heard the Chymes at mid-night, Ma- ster
Shallow.
That wee haue, that wee haue; in faith, Sir
Iohn,
wee haue: our watch-word was, Hem-Boyes. Come, let's to Dinner; come, let's to Dinner: Oh the dayes that wee haue seene. Come, come.
Good Master Corporate
Bardolph,
stand my friend, and heere is foure
Harry
tenne shillings in French Crownes for you: in very truth, sir, I had as lief be hang'd sir, as goe: and yet, for mine owne part, sir, I do not care; but rather, because I am vnwilling, and for mine owne part, haue a desire to stay with my friends: else, sir, I did not care, for mine owne part, so much.
Go-too: stand aside.
And good Master Corporall Captaine, for my old Dames sake, stand my friend: shee hath no body to doe any thing about her, when I am gone: and she is old, and cannot helpe her selfe: you shall haue fortie, sir.
Go-too: stand aside.
I care not, a man can die but once: wee owe a death. I will neuer beare a base minde: if it be my desti- nie, so: if it be not, so: no man is too good to serue his Prince: and let it goe which way it will, he that dies this yeere, is quit for the next.
Well said, thou art a good fellow.
Nay, I will beare no base minde.
Come sir, which men shall I haue?
Foure of which you please.
Sir, a word with you: I haue three pound, to free
Mouldie
and
Bull-calfe.
Go-too: well.
Come, sir
Iohn,
which foure will you haue?
Doe you chuse for me.
Marry then,
Mouldie, Bull-calfe, Feeble,
and
Shadow.
Mouldie,
and
Bull-calfe:
for you
Mouldie,
stay at home, till you are past seruice: and for your part,
Bull-calfe,
grow till you come vnto it: I will none of you.
Sir
Iohn,
Sir
Iohn,
doe not your selfe wrong, they are your likelyest men, and I would haue you seru'd with the best.
Will you tell me (Master
Shallow
) how to chuse a man? Care I for the Limbe, the Thewes, the stature, bulke, and bigge assemblance of a man? giue mee the spirit (Master
Shallow.
) Where's
Wart
? you see what a ragged appearance it is: hee shall charge you, and discharge you, with the motion of a Pewterers Ham- mer: come off, and on, swifter then hee that gibbets on the Brewers Bucket. And this same halfe-fac'd fellow,
Shadow,
giue me this man: hee presents no marke to the Enemie, the foe-man may with as great ayme leuell at the edge of a Pen-knife: and for a Retrait, how swiftly will this
Feeble,
the Womans Taylor, runne off. O, giue me the spare men, and spare me the great ones. Put me a Calyuer into
Warts
hand,
Bardolph.
Hold
Wart,
Trauerse: thus, thus, thus.
Come, manage me your Calyuer: so: very well, go-too, very good, exceeding good. O, giue me alwayes a little, leane, old, chopt, bald Shot. Well said
Wart,
thou art a good Scab: hold, there is a Tester for thee.
Hee is not his Crafts-master, hee doth not doe it right. I remember at Mile-end-Greene, when I lay at
Clements
Inne, I was then Sir
Dagonet
in
Arthurs
Show: there was a little quiuer fellow, and hee would manage you his Peece thus: and hee would about, and about, and come you in, and come you in: Rah, tah, tah, would hee say, Bownce would hee say, and away againe would hee goe, and againe would he come: I shall neuer see such a fellow.
These fellowes will doe well, Master
Shallow.
Farewell Master
Silence,
I will not vse many wordes with you: fare you well, Gentlemen both: I thanke you: I must a dozen mile to night.
Bardolph,
giue the Souldiers Coates.
Sir
Iohn,
Heauen blesse you, and prosper your Affaires, and send vs Peace. As you returne, visit my house. Let our old acquaintance be renewed: per- aduenture I will with you to the Court.
I would you would, Master
Shallow.
Go-too: I haue spoke at a word. Fare you well.
Exit.
Fare you well, gentle Gentlemen. On
Bar-dolph,
leade the men away. As I returne, I will fetch off these Iustices: I doe see the bottome of Iustice
Shal-low.
How subiect wee old men are to this vice of Ly- ing? This same staru'd Iustice hath done nothing but prate to me of the wildenesse of his Youth, and the Feates hee hath done about Turnball-street, and euery third word a Lye, duer pay'd to the hearer, then the Turkes Tribute. I doe remember him at
Clements
Inne, like a man made after Supper, of a Cheese-paring. When hee was naked, hee was, for all the world, like a forked Radish, with a Head fantastically caru'd vpon it with a Knife. Hee was so forlorne, that his Dimensions (to any thicke sight) were inuincible. Hee was the very
Genius
of Famine: hee came euer in the rere-ward of the Fashion: And now is this Vices Dagger become a Squire, and talkes as familiarly of
Iohn
of Gaunt, as if hee had beene sworne Brother to him: and Ile be sworne hee neuer saw him but once in the Tilt-yard, and then he burst his Head, for crowding among the Marshals men. I saw it, and told
Iohn
of Gaunt, hee beat his owne Name, for you might haue truss'd him and all his Ap- parrell into an Eele-skinne: the Case of a Treble Hoe- boy was a Mansion for him: a Court: and now hath hee Land, and Beeues. Well, I will be acquainted with him, if I returne: and it shall goe hard, but I will make him a Philosophers two Stones to me. If the young Dace be a Bayt for the old Pike, I see no reason, in the Law of Nature, but I may snap at him. Let time shape, and there an end.
Exeunt.
Actus Quartus. Scena Prima.
Enter the Arch-bishop, Mowbray, Hastings, Westmerland, Coleuile.
What is this Forrest call'd?
'Tis Gaultree Forrest, and't shall please your Grace.
Here stand (my Lords) and send discouerers forth, To know the numbers of our Enemies.
Wee haue sent forth alreadie.
'Tis well done. My Friends, and Brethren (in these great Affaires) I must acquaint you, that I haue receiu'd New-dated Letters from
Northumberland:
Their cold intent, tenure, and substance thus. Here doth hee wish his Person, with such Powers As might hold sortance with his Qualitie, The which hee could not leuie: whereupon Hee is retyr'd, to ripe his growing Fortunes, To Scotland; and concludes in heartie prayers, That your Attempts may ouer-liue the hazard, And fearefull meeting of their Opposite.
Thus do the hopes we haue in him, touch ground, And dash themselues to pieces.
Enter a Messenger.
Now? what newes?
West of this Forrest, scarcely off a mile, In goodly forme, comes on the Enemie: And by the ground they hide, I iudge their number Vpon, or neere, the rate of thirtie thousand.
The iust proportion that we gaue them out. Let vs sway-on, and face them in the field.
Enter Westmerland.
What well-appointed Leader fronts vs here?
I thinke it is my Lord of Westmerland.
Health, and faire greeting from our Generall, The Prince, Lord
Iohn,
and Duke of Lancaster.
Say on (my Lord of Westmerland) in peace: What doth concerne your comming?
Then (my Lord) Vnto your Grace doe I in chiefe addresse The substance of my Speech. If that Rebellion Came like it selfe, in base and abiect Routs, Led on by bloodie Youth, guarded with Rage, And countenanc'd by Boyes, and Beggerie: I say, if damn'd Commotion so appeare, In his true, natiue, and most proper shape, You (Reuerend Father, and these Noble Lords) Had not beene here, to dresse the ougly forme Of base, and bloodie Insurrection, With your faire Honors. You, Lord Arch-bishop, Whose Sea is by a Ciuill Peace maintain'd, Whose Beard, the Siluer Hand of Peace hath touch'd, Whose Learning, and good Letters, Peace hath tutor'd, Whose white Inuestments figure Innocence, The Doue, and very blessed Spirit of Peace. Wherefore doe you so
ill
translate your selfe, Out of the Speech of Peace, that beares such grace, Into the harsh and boystrous Tongue of Warre? Turning your Bookes to Graues, your Inke to Blood, Your Pennes to Launces, and your Tongue diuine To a lowd Trumpet, and a Point of Warre.
Wherefore doe I this? so the Question stands. Briefely to this end: Wee are all diseas'd, And with our surfetting, and wanton howres, Haue brought our selues into a burning Feuer, And wee must bleede for it: of which Disease, Our late King
Richard
(being infected) dy'd. But (my most Noble Lord of Westmerland) I take not on me here as a Physician, Nor doe I, as an Enemie to Peace, Troope in the Throngs of Militarie men: But rather shew
a
while like fearefull Warre, To dyet ranke Mindes, sicke of happinesse, And purge th' obstructions, which begin to stop Our very Veines of Life: heare me more plainely. I haue in equall ballance iustly weigh'd, What wrongs our Arms may do, what wrongs we suffer, And finde our Griefes heauier then our Offences. Wee see which way the streame of Time doth runne, And are enforc'd from our most quiet there, By the rough Torrent of Occasion, And haue the summarie of all our Griefes (When time shall serue) to shew in Articles; Which long ere this, wee offer'd to the King, And might, by no Suit, gayne our Audience: When wee are wrong'd, and would vnfold our Griefes, Wee are deny'd accesse vnto his Person, Euen by those men, that most haue done vs wrong. The dangers of the dayes but newly gone, Whose memorie is written on the Earth With yet appearing blood; and the examples Of euery Minutes instance (present now) Hath put vs in these ill-beseeming Armes: Not to breake Peace, or any Branch of it, But to establish here a Peace indeede, Concurring both in Name and Qualitie.
When euer yet was your Appeale deny'd? Wherein haue you beene galled by the King? What Peere hath beene suborn'd, to grate on you, That you should seale this lawlesse bloody Booke Of forg'd Rebellion, with a Seale diuine?
My Brother generall, the Common- wealth, I make my Quarrell, in particular.
There is no neede of any such redresse: Or if there were, it not belongs to you.
Why not to him in part, and to vs all, That feele the bruizes of the dayes before, And suffer the Condition of these Times To lay a heauie and vnequall Hand vpon our Honors?
O my good Lord
Mowbray,
Construe the Times to their Necessities, And you shall say (indeede) it is the Time, And not the King, that doth you iniuries. Yet for your part, it not appeares to me, Either from the King, or in the present Time, That you should haue an ynch of any ground To build a Griefe on: were you not restor'd To all the Duke of Norfolkes Seignories, Your Noble, and right well-remembred Fathers?
What thing, in Honor, had my Father lost, That need to be reuiu'd, and breath'd in me? The King that lou'd him, as the State stood then, Was forc'd, perforce compell'd to banish him: And then, that
Henry Bullingbrooke
and hee Being mounted, and both rowsed in their Seates, Their neighing Coursers daring of the Spurre, Their armed Staues in charge, their Beauers downe, Their eyes of fire, sparkling through sights of Steele, And the lowd Trumpet blowing them together: Then, then, when there was nothing could haue stay'd My Father from the Breast of
Bullingbrooke;
O, when the King did throw his Warder downe, (His owne Life hung vpon the Staffe hee threw) Then threw hee downe himselfe, and all their Liues, That by Indictment, and by dint of Sword, Haue since mis-carryed vnder
Bullingbrooke.
You speak (Lord
Mowbray
) now you know not what. The Earle of Hereford was reputed then In England the most valiant Gentleman. Who knowes, on whom Fortune would then haue smil'd? But if your Father had beene Victor there, Hee ne're had borne it out of Couentry. For all the Countrey, in a generall voyce, Cry'd hate vpon him: and all their prayers, and loue, Were set on
Herford,
whom they doted on, And bless'd, and grac'd, and did more then the King. But this is meere digression from my purpose. Here come I from our Princely Generall, To know your Griefes; to tell you, from his Grace, That hee will giue you Audience: and wherein It shall appeare, that your demands are iust, You shall enioy them, euery thing set off, That might so much as thinke you Enemies.
But hee hath forc'd vs to compell this Offer, And it proceedes from Pollicy, not Loue.
Mowbray,
you ouer-weene to take it so: This Offer comes from Mercy, not from Feare. For loe, within a Ken our Army lyes, Vpon mine Honor, all too confident To giue admittance to a thought of feare. Our Battaile is more full of Names then yours, Our Men more perfect in the vse of Armes, Our Armor all as strong, our Cause the best; Then Reason will, our hearts should be as good. Say you not then, our Offer is compell'd.
Well, by my
will
, wee shall admit no Parley.
That argues but the shame of your offence: A rotten Case abides no handling.
Hath the Prince
Iohn
a full Commission, In very ample vertue of his Father, To heare, and absolutely to determine Of what Conditions wee shall stand vpon?
That is intended in the Generals Name: I muse you make so slight a Question.
Then take (my Lord of Westmerland) this Schedule, For this containes our generall Grieuances: Each seuerall Article herein redress'd, All members of our Cause, both here, and hence, That are insinewed to this Action, Acquitted by a true substantiall forme, And present execution of our wills, To vs, and to our purposes confin'd, Wee come within our awfull Banks againe, And knit our Powers to the Arme of Peace.
This will I shew the Generall. Please you Lords, In sight of both our Battailes, wee may meete At either end in peace: which Heauen so frame, Or to the place of difference call the Swords, Which must decide it.
My Lord, wee will doe so.
There is a thing within my Bosome tells me, That no Conditions of our Peace can stand.
Feare you not, that if wee can make our Peace Vpon such large termes, and so absolute, As our Conditions shall consist vpon, Our Peace shall stand as firme as Rockie Mountaines.
I
, but our valuation shall be such, That euery slight, and false-deriued Cause, Yea, euery idle, nice, and wanton Reason, Shall, to the King, taste of this Action: That were our Royall faiths, Martyrs in Loue, Wee shall be winnowed with so rough a winde, That euen our Corne shall seeme as light as Chaffe, And good from bad finde no partition.
No, no (my Lord) note this: the King is wearie Of daintie, and such picking Grieuances: For hee hath found, to end one doubt by Death, Reuiues two greater in the Heires of Life. And therefore will hee wipe his Tables cleane, And keepe no Tell-tale to his Memorie, That may repeat, and Historie his losse, To new remembrance. For full well hee knowes, Hee cannot so precisely weede this Land, As his mis-doubts present occasion: His foes are so en-rooted with his friends, That plucking to vnfixe an Enemie, Hee doth vnfasten so, and shake a friend. So that this Land, like an offensiue wife, That hath enrag'd him on, to offer strokes, As he is striking, holds his Infant vp, And hangs resolu'd Correction in the Arme,
That was vprear'd to execution.
Besides, the King hath wasted all his Rods, On late Offenders, that he now doth lacke The very Instruments of Chasticement: So that his power, like to a Fanglesse Lion May offer, but not hold.
'Tis very true: And therefore be assur'd (my good Lord Marshal) If we do now make our attonement well, Our Peace, will (like a broken Limbe vnited) Grow stronger, for the breaking.
Be it so: Heere is return'd my Lord of Westmerland.
Enter Westmerland.
The Prince is here at hand: pleaseth your Lordship To meet his Grace, iust distance 'tweene our Armies?
Your Grace of Yorke, in heauen's name then forward.
Before, and greet his Grace (my Lord) we come.
Enter Prince Iohn.
You are wel encountred here (my cosin
Mowbray
) Good day to you, gentle Lord Archbishop, And so to you Lord
Hastings,
and to all. My Lord of Yorke, it better shew'd with you, When that your Flocke (assembled by the Bell) Encircled you, to heare with reuerence Your exposition on the holy Text, Then now to see you heere an Iron man Chearing a rowt of Rebels with your Drumme, Turning the Word, to Sword; and Life to death:
That man that sits within a Monarches heart, And ripens in the Sunne-shine of his fauor, Would hee abuse the Countenance of the King, Alack, what Mischiefes might hee set abroach, In shadow of such Greatnesse? With you, Lord Bishop, It is euen so. Who hath not heard it spoken, How deepe you were within the Bookes of Heauen? To vs, the Speaker in his Parliament; To vs, th' imagine Voyce of Heauen it selfe: The very Opener, and Intelligencer, Betweene the Grace, the Sanctities of Heauen; And our dull workings. O, who shall beleeue, But you mis-vse the reuerence of your Place, Employ the Countenance, and Grace of Heauen, As a false Fauorite doth his Princes Name, In deedes dis-honorable? You haue taken vp, Vnder the counterfeited Zeale of Heauen, The Subiects of Heauens Substitute, my Father, And both against the Peace of Heauen, and him, Haue here vp-swarmed them.
Good my Lord of Lancaster, I am not here against your Fathers Peace: But (as I told my Lord of Westmerland) The Time (mis-order'd) doth in common sence Crowd vs, and crush vs, to this monstrous Forme, To hold our safetie vp. I sent your Grace The parcels, and particulars of our Griefe, The which hath been with scorne shou'd from the Court: Whereon this
Hydra
-Sonne of Warre is borne, Whose dangerous eyes may well be charm'd asleepe, With graunt of our most iust and right desires; And true Obedience, of this Madnesse cur'd, Stoope tamely to the foot of Maiestie.
If not, wee readie are to trye our fortunes, To the last man.
And though wee here fall downe, Wee haue Supplyes, to second our Attempt: If they mis-carry, theirs shall second them. And so, successe of Mischiefe shall be borne, And Heire from Heire shall hold this Quarrell vp, Whiles England shall haue generation.
You are too shallow (
Hastings
) Much too shallow, To sound the bottome of the after-Times.
Pleaseth your Grace, to answere them directly, How farre-forth you doe like their Articles.
I like them all, and doe allow them well: And sweare here, by the honor of my blood, My Fathers purposes haue beene mistooke, And some, about him, haue too lauishly Wrested his meaning, and Authoritie. My Lord, these Griefes shall be with speed redrest: Vpon my Life, they shall. If this may please you, Discharge your Powers vnto their seuerall Counties, As wee will ours: and here, betweene the Armies, Let's drinke together friendly, and embrace, That all their eyes may beare those Tokens home, Of our restored Loue, and Amitie.
I take your Princely word, for these redresses.
I giue it you, and will maintaine my word: And thereupon I drinke vnto your Grace.
Goe Captaine, and deliuer to the Armie This newes of Peace: let them haue pay, and part: I know, it will well please them. High thee Captaine.
Exit.
To you, my Noble Lord of Westmerland.
I pledge your Grace: And if you knew what paines I haue bestow'd, To breede this present Peace, You would drinke freely: but my loue to ye, Shall shew it selfe more openly hereafter.
I doe not doubt you.
I am glad of it. Health to my Lord, and gentle Cousin
Mowbray.
You wish me health in very happy season, For I am, on the sodaine, something
ill
.
Against
ill
Chances, men are euer merry, But heauinesse fore-runnes the good euent.
Therefore be merry (Cooze) since sodaine sorrow Serues to say thus: some good thing comes to morrow.
Beleeue me, I am passing light in spirit.
So much the worse, if your owne Rule be true.
The word of Peace is render'd: hearke how they showt.
This had been chearefull, after Victorie.
A Peace is of the nature of a Conquest: For then both parties nobly are subdu'd, And neither partie looser.
Goe (my Lord) And let our Army be discharged too: And good my Lord (so please you) let our Traines March by vs, that wee may peruse the men
Exit.
Wee should haue coap'd withall.
Goe, good Lord
Hastings:
And ere they be dismiss'd, let them march by.
Exit.
I trust (Lords) wee shall lye to night together.
Enter Westmerland.
Now Cousin, wherefore stands our Army still?
The Leaders hauing charge from you to stand, Will not goe off, vntill they heare you speake.
They know their duties.
Enter Hastings.
Our Army is dispers'd: Like youthfull Steeres, vnyoak'd, they tooke their course East, West, North, South: or like a Schoole, broke vp, Each hurryes towards his home, and sporting place.
Good tidings (my Lord
Hastings
) for the which, I doe arrest thee (Traytor) of high Treason: And you Lord Arch-bishop, and you Lord
Mowbray,
Of Capitall Treason, I attach you both.
Is this proceeding iust, and honorable?
Is your Assembly so?
Will you thus breake your faith?
I pawn'd thee none: I promis'd you redresse of these same Grieuances Whereof you did complaine; which, by mine Honor, I will performe, with a most Christian care. But for you (Rebels) looke to taste the due Meet for Rebellion, and such Acts as yours. Most shallowly did you these Armes commence, Fondly brought here, and foolishly sent hence. Strike vp our Drummes, pursue the scatter'd stray, Heauen, and not wee, haue safely fought to day. Some guard these Traitors to the Block of Death, Treasons true Bed, and yeelder vp of breath.
Exeunt.
Enter Falstaffe and Colleuile.
What's your Name, Sir? of what Condition are you? and of what place, I pray?
I am a Knight, Sir: And my Name is
Colleuile
of the Dale.
Well then,
Colleuile
is your Name, a Knight is your Degree, and your Place, the Dale.
Colleuile
shall still be your Name, a Traytor your Degree, and the Dun- geon your Place, a place deepe enough: so shall you be still
Colleuile
of the Dale.
Are not you Sir
Iohn Falstaffe
?
As good a man as he sir, who ere I am: doe yee yeelde sir, or shall I sweate for you? if I doe sweate, they are the drops of thy Louers, and they weep for thy death, therefore rowze vp Feare and Trembling, and do obser- uance to my mercy.
I thinke you are Sir
Iohn Falstaffe,
& in that thought yeeld me.
I haue a whole Schoole of tongues in this belly of mine, and not a Tongue of them all, speakes anie other word but my name:
and
I had but a belly of any indiffe- rencie, I were simply the most actiue fellow in Europe: my wombe, my wombe, my wombe vndoes mee. Heere comes our Generall.
Enter Prince Iohn, and Westmerland.
The heat is past, follow no farther now: Call in the Powers, good Cousin
Westmerland.
Now
Falstaffe,
where haue you beene all this while? When euery thing is ended, then you come. These tardie Tricks of yours will (on my life) One time, or other, breake some Gallowes back.
I would bee sorry (my Lord) but it should bee thus: I neuer knew yet, but rebuke and checke was the reward of Valour. Doe you thinke me a Swallow, an Ar- row, or a Bullet? Haue I, in my poore and olde Motion, the expedition of Thought? I haue speeded hither with the very extremest ynch of possibilitie. I haue fowndred nine score and odde Postes: and heere (trauell-tainted as I am) haue, in my pure and immaculate Valour, taken Sir
Iohn Colleuile
of the Dale, a most furious Knight, and valorous Enemie: But what of that? hee saw mee, and yeelded: that I may iustly say with the hooke-nos'd fellow of Rome, I came, saw, and ouer-came.
It was more of his Courtesie, then your deser- uing.
I know not: heere hee is, and heere I yeeld him: and I beseech your Grace, let it be book'd, with the rest of this dayes deedes; or I sweare, I will haue it in a particular Ballad, with mine owne Picture on the top of it (
Colleuile
kissing my foot:) To the which course, if I be enforc'd, if you do not all shew like gilt two-pences to me; and I, in the cleare Skie of Fame, o're-shine you as much as the Full Moone doth the Cynders of the Ele- ment (which shew like Pinnes-heads to her) beleeue not the Word of the Noble: therefore let mee haue right, and let desert mount.
Thine's too heauie to mount.
Let it shine then.
Thine's too thick to shine.
Let it doe something (my good Lord) that may doe me good, and call it what you will.
Is thy Name
Colleuile
?
It is (my Lord.)
A famous Rebell art thou,
Colleuile.
And a famous true Subiect tooke him.
I am (my Lord) but as my Betters are, That led me hither: had they beene rul'd by me, You should haue wonne them dearer then you haue.
I know not how they sold themselues, but thou like a kinde fellow, gau'st thy selfe away; and I thanke thee, for thee.
Enter Westmerland.
Haue you left pursuit?
Retreat is made, and Execution stay'd.
Send
Colleuile,
with his Confederates, To Yorke, to present Execution.
Blunt,
leade him hence, and see you guard him sure.
Exit with Colleuile.
And now dispatch we toward the Court (my Lords) I heare the King, my Father, is sore sicke. Our Newes shall goe before vs, to his Maiestie, Which (Cousin) you shall beare, to comfort him: And wee with sober speede will follow you.
My Lord, I beseech you, giue me leaue to goe through Gloucestershire: and when you come to Court, stand my good Lord, 'pray, in your good report.
Fare you well,
Falstaffe:
I, in my condition, Shall better speake of you, then you deserue.
Exit.
I would you had but the wit: 'twere better then your Dukedome. Good faith, this same young so-ber-blooded Boy doth not loue me, nor a man cannot make him laugh: but that's no maruaile, hee drinkes no Wine. There's neuer any of these demure Boyes come to any proofe: for thinne Drinke doth so ouer-coole their blood, and making many Fish-Meales, that they fall into a kinde of Male Greene-sicknesse: and then, when they marry, they get Wenches. They are generally Fooles, and Cowards; which some of vs should be too, but for inflamation. A good Sherris-Sack hath a two-fold operation in it: it ascends me into the Braine, dryes me there all the foolish, and dull, and cruddie Vapours, which enuiron it: makes it apprehensiue, quicke, forge- tiue, full of nimble, fierie, and delectable shapes; which deliuer'd o're to the Voyce, the Tongue, which is the Birth, becomes excellent Wit. The second propertie of your excellent Sherris, is, the warming of the Blood: which before (cold, and setled) left the Liuer white, and pale; which is the Badge of Pusillanimitie, and Cowar- dize: but the Sherris warmes it, and makes it course from the inwards, to the parts extremes: it illuminateth the Face, which (as a Beacon) giues warning to all the rest of this little Kingdome (Man) to Arme: and then the Vitall Commoners, and in-land pettie Spirits, muster me all to their Captaine, the Heart; who great, and pufft vp with his Retinue, doth any Deed of Courage: and this Valour comes of Sherris. So, that skill in the Weapon is nothing, without Sack (for that sets it a-worke:) and Learning, a meere Hoord of Gold, kept by a Deuill, till Sack commences it, and sets it in act, and vse. Hereof comes it, that Prince
Harry
is valiant: for the cold blood hee did naturally inherite of his Father, hee hath, like leane, stirrill, and bare Land, manured, husbanded, and tyll'd, with excellent endeauour of drinking good, and good store of fertile Sherris, that hee is become very hot, and valiant. If I had a thousand Sonnes, the first Principle I would teach them, should be to forsweare thinne Pota- tions, and to addict themselues to Sack.
Enter Bardolph.
How now
Bardolph
?
The Armie is discharged all, and gone.
Let them goe: Ile through Gloucestershire, and there will I visit Master
Robert Shallow,
Esquire: I haue him alreadie tempering betweene my finger and my thombe, and shortly will I seale with him. Come away.
Exeunt.
Scena Secunda.
Enter King, Warwicke, Clarence, Gloucester.
Now Lords, if Heauen doth giue successefull end To this Debate, that bleedeth at our doores, Wee will our Youth lead on to higher Fields, And draw no Swords, but what are sanctify'd. Our Nauie is addressed, our Power collected, Our Substitutes, in absence, well inuested, And euery thing lyes leuell to our wish; Onely wee want a little personall Strength: And pawse vs, till these Rebels, now a-foot, Come vnderneath the yoake of Gouernment.
Both which we doubt not, but your Maiestie Shall soone enioy.
Humphrey
(my Sonne of Gloucester) where is the Prince, your Brother?
I thinke hee's gone to hunt (my Lord) at Wind- sor.
And how accompanied?
I doe not know (my Lord.)
Is not his Brother,
Thomas
of Clarence, with him?
No (my good Lord) hee is in presence heere.
What would my Lord, and Father?
Nothing but well to thee,
Thomas
of Clarence. How chance thou art not with the Prince, thy Brother? Hee loues thee, and thou do'st neglect him (
Thomas.
) Thou hast a better place in his Affection, Then all thy Brothers: cherish it (my Boy) And Noble Offices thou may'st effect Of Mediation (after I am dead) Betweene his Greatnesse, and thy other Brethren. Therefore omit him not: blunt not his Loue, Nor loose the good aduantage of his Grace, By seeming cold, or carelesse of his
will
. For hee is gracious, if hee be obseru'd: Hee hath a Teare for Pitie, and a Hand Open (as Day) for melting Charitie: Yet notwithstanding, being incens'd, hee's Flint, As humorous as Winter, and as sudden, As Flawes congealed in the Spring of day. His temper therefore must be well obseru'd: Chide him for faults, and doe it reuerently, When you perceiue his blood enclin'd to mirth: But being moodie, giue him Line, and scope, Till that his passions (like a Whale on ground) Confound themselues with working. Learne this
Thomas,
And thou shalt proue a shelter to thy friends, A Hoope of Gold, to binde thy Brothers in: That the vnited Vessell of their Blood (Mingled with Venome of Suggestion, As force, perforce, the Age will powre it in) Shall neuer leake, though it doe worke as strong As
Aconitum,
or rash Gun-powder.
I shall obserue him with all care, and loue.
Why art thou not at Windsor with him (
Tho-mas
?)
Hee is not there to day: hee dines in Lon- don.
And how accompanyed? Canst thou tell that?
With
Pointz,
and other his continuall fol- lowers.
Most subiect is the fattest Soyle to Weedes: And hee (the Noble Image of my Youth) Is ouer-spread with them: therefore my griefe Stretches it selfe beyond the howre of death. The blood weepes from my heart, when I doe shape (In formes imaginarie) th' vnguided Dayes, And rotten Times, that you shall looke vpon, When I am sleeping with my Ancestors. For when his head-strong Riot hath no Curbe, When Rage and hot-Blood are his Counsailors, When Meanes and lauish Manners meete together; Oh, with what Wings shall his Affections flye Towards fronting Perill, and oppos'd Decay?
My gracious Lord, you looke beyond him quite: The Prince but studies his Companions, Like a strange Tongue: wherein, to gaine the Language, 'Tis needfull, that the most immodest word Be look'd vpon, and learn'd: which once attayn'd, Your Highnesse knowes, comes to no farther vse, But to be knowne, and hated. So, like grosse termes, The Prince will, in the perfectnesse of time, Cast off his followers: and their memorie Shall as a Patterne, or a Measure, liue, By which his Grace must mete the liues of others, Turning past-euills to aduantages.
'Tis seldome, when the
Bee
doth leaue her Combe In the dead Carrion.
Enter Westmerland.
Who's heere?
Westmerland
?
Health to my Soueraigne, and new happinesse Added to that, that I am to deliuer. Prince
Iohn,
your Sonne, doth kisse your Graces Hand:
Mowbray,
the Bishop,
Scroope, Hastings,
and all, Are brought to the Correction of your Law. There is not now a Rebels Sword vnsheath'd, But Peace puts forth her Oliue euery where: The manner how this Action hath beene borne, Here (at more leysure) may your Highnesse reade, With euery course, in his particular.
O
Westmerland,
thou art a Summer Bird, Which euer in the haunch of Winter sings The lifting vp of day.
Enter Harcourt.
Looke, heere's more newes.
From Enemies, Heauen keepe your Maiestie: And when they stand against you, may they fall, As those that I am come to tell you of. The Earle
Northumberland,
and the Lord
Bardolfe,
With a great Power of English, and of Scots, Are by the Sherife of Yorkeshire ouerthrowne: The manner, and true order of the fight, This Packet (please it you) containes at large.
And wherefore should these good newes Make me sicke? Will Fortune neuer come with both hands full, But write her faire words still in foulest Letters? Shee eyther giues a Stomack, and no Foode, (Such are the poore, in health) or else a Feast, And takes away the Stomack (such are the Rich, That haue aboundance, and enioy it not.) I should reioyce now, at this happy newes, And now my Sight fayles, and my Braine is giddie. O me, come neere me, now I am much
ill
.
Comfort your Maiestie.
Oh, my Royall Father.
My Soueraigne Lord, cheare vp your selfe, looke vp.
Be patient (Princes) you doe know, these Fits Are with his Highnesse very ordinarie. Stand from him, giue him ayre: Hee'le straight be well.
No, no, hee cannot long hold out: these pangs, Th' incessant care, and labour of his Minde, Hath wrought the Mure, that should confine it in, So thinne, that Life lookes through, and will breake out.
The people feare me: for they doe obserue Vnfather'd Heires, and loathly Births of Nature: The Seasons change their manners, as the Yeere Had found some Moneths asleepe, and leap'd them ouer.
The Riuer hath thrice flow'd, no ebbe betweene: And the old folke (Times doting Chronicles) Say it did so, a little time before That our great Grand-sire
Edward
sick'd, and dy'de.
Speake lower (Princes) for the King reco- uers.
This Apoplexie will (certaine) be his end.
I pray you take me vp, and beare me hence Into some other Chamber: softly 'pray. Let there be no noyse made (my gentle friends) Vnlesse some dull and fauourable hand Will whisper Musicke to my wearie Spirit.
Call for the Musicke in the other Roome.
Set me the Crowne vpon my Pillow here.
His eye is hollow, and hee changes much.
Lesse noyse, lesse noyse.
Enter Prince Henry.
Who saw the Duke of Clarence?
I am here (Brother) full of heauinesse.
How now? Raine within doores, and none abroad? How doth the King?
Exceeding
ill
.
Heard hee the good newes yet? Tell it him.
Hee alter'd much, vpon the hearing it.
If hee be sicke with Ioy, Hee'le recouer without Physicke.
Not so much noyse (my Lords) Sweet Prince speake lowe, The King, your Father, is dispos'd to sleepe.
Let vs with-draw into the other Roome.
Wil
't please your Grace to goe along with vs?
No: I will sit, and watch here, by the King. Why doth the Crowne lye there, vpon his Pillow, Being so troublesome a Bed-fellow? O pollish'd Perturbation! Golden Care! That keep'st the Ports of Slumber open wide, To many a watchfull Night: sleepe with it now, Yet not so sound, and halfe so deepely sweete, As hee whose Brow (with homely Biggen bound) Snores out the Watch of Night. O Maiestie! When thou do'st pinch thy Bearer, thou do'st sit Like a rich Armor, worne in heat of day, That scald'st with safetie: by his Gates of breath, There lyes a dowlney feather, which stirres not: Did hee suspire, that light and weightlesse dowlne Perforce must moue. My gracious Lord, my Father, This sleepe is sound indeede: this is a sleepe, That from this Golden Rigoll hath diuorc'd So many English Kings. Thy due, from me, Is Teares, and heauie Sorrowes of the Blood, Which Nature, Loue, and filiall tendernesse, Shall (O deare Father) pay thee plenteously. My due, from thee, is this Imperiall Crowne, Which (as immediate from thy Place, and Blood) Deriues it selfe to me. Loe, heere it sits, Which Heauen shall guard: And put the worlds whole strength into one gyant Arme, It shall not force this Lineall Honor from me. This, from thee, will I to mine leaue, As 'tis left to me.
Exit.
Enter Warwicke, Gloucester, Clarence.
Warwicke, Gloucester, Clarence.
Doth the King call?
What would your Maiestie? how fares your Grace?
Why did you leaue me here alone (my Lords?)
We left the Prince (my Brother) here (my Liege) Who vndertooke to sit and watch by you.
The Prince of Wales? where is hee? let mee see him.
This doore is open, hee is gone this way.
Hee came not through the Chamber where wee stayd.
Where is the Crowne? who tooke it from my Pillow?
When wee with-drew (my Liege) wee left it heere.
The Prince hath ta'ne it hence: Goe seeke him out. Is hee so hastie, that hee doth suppose My sleepe, my death? Finde him (my Lord of Warwick) Chide him hither: this part of his conioynes With my disease, and helpes to end me. See Sonnes, what things you are: How quickly Nature falls into reuolt, When Gold becomes her Obiect? For this, the foolish ouer-carefull Fathers Haue broke their sleepes with thoughts, Their braines with care, their bones with industry. For this, they haue ingrossed and pyl'd vp The canker'd heapes of strange-atchieued Gold: For this, they haue beene thoughtfull, to inuest Their Sonnes with Arts, and Martiall Exercises: When, like the
Bee
, culling from euery flower The vertuous Sweetes, our Thighes packt with Wax, Our Mouthes with Honey, wee bring it to the Hiue; And like the Bees, are murthered for our paines. This bitter taste yeelds his engrossements, To the ending Father.
Enter Warwicke.
Now, where is hee, that will not stay so long, Till his Friend Sicknesse hath determin'd me?
My Lord, I found the Prince in the next Roome, Washing with kindly Teares his gentle Cheekes, With such a deepe demeanure, in great sorrow, That Tyranny, which neuer quafft but blood, Would (by beholding him) haue wash'd his Knife With gentle eye-drops. Hee is comming hither.
But wherefore did hee take away the Crowne?
Enter Prince Henry.
Loe, where hee comes. Come hither to me (
Harry.
) Depart the Chamber, leaue vs heere alone.
Exit.
I neuer thought to heare you speake againe.
Thy wish was Father (
Harry
) to that thought: I stay too long by thee, I wearie thee. Do'st thou so hunger for my emptie Chayre, That thou wilt needes inuest thee with mine Honors, Before thy howre be ripe? O foolish Youth! Thou seek'st the Greatnesse, that will ouer-whelme thee. Stay but a little: for my Cloud of Dignitie Is held from falling, with so weake a winde, That it will quickly drop: my Day is dimme. Thou hast stolne that, which after some few howres Were thine, without offence: and at my death Thou hast seal'd vp my expectation. Thy Life did manifest, thou lou'dst me not, And thou wilt haue me dye assur'd of it. Thou hid'st a thousand Daggers in thy thoughts, Which thou hast whetted on thy stonie heart, To stab at halfe an howre of my Life. What? canst thou not forbeare me halfe an howre?
Then get thee gone, and digge my graue thy selfe, And bid the merry Bels ring to thy eare That thou art Crowned, not that I am dead. Let all the Teares, that should bedew my Hearse Be drops of Balme, to sanctifie thy head: Onely compound me with forgotten dust. Giue that, which gaue thee life, vnto the Wormes: Plucke downe my Officers, breake my Decrees; For now a time is come, to mocke at Forme. Henry the fift is Crown'd: Vp Vanity, Downe Royall State: All you sage Counsailors, hence: And to the English Court, assemble now From eu'ry Region, Apes of Idlenesse. Now neighbor-Confines, purge you of your Scum: Haue you a Ruffian that will sweare? drinke? dance? Reuell the night? Rob? Murder? and commit The oldest sinnes, the newest kinde of wayes? Be happy, he will trouble you no more: England, shall double gill'd, his trebble guilt. England, shall giue him Office, Honor,
Might
: For the Fift
Harry,
from curb'd License pluckes The muzzle of Restraint; and the wilde Dogge Shall flesh his tooth in euery Innocent. O my poore Kingdome (sicke, with ciuill blowes) When that my Care could not with-hold thy Ryots, What wilt thou do, when Ryot is thy Care? O, thou wilt be a Wildernesse againe, Peopled with Wolues (thy old Inhabitants.)
O pardon me (my Liege) But for my Teares, The most Impediments vnto my Speech, I had fore-stall'd this deere, and deepe Rebuke, Ere you (with greefe) had spoke, and I had heard The course of it so farre. There is your Crowne, And he that weares the Crowne immortally, Long guard it yours. If I affect it more, Then as your Honour, and as your Renowne, Let me no more from this Obedience rise, Which my most true, and inward duteous Spirit Teacheth this prostrate, and exteriour bending. Heauen witnesse with me, when I heere came in, And found no course of breath within your Maiestie, How cold it strooke my heart. If I do faine, O let me, in my present wildenesse, dye, And neuer liue, to shew th' incredulous World, The Noble change that I haue purposed. Comming to looke on you, thinking you dead, (And dead almost (my Liege) to thinke you were) I spake vnto the Crowne (as hauing sense) And thus vpbraided it. The Care on thee depending, Hath fed vpon the body of my Father, Therefore, thou best of Gold, art worst of Gold. Other, lesse fine in Charract, is more precious, Preseruing life, in Med'cine potable: But thou, most Fine, most Honour'd, most Renown'd, Hast eate the Bearer vp. Thus (my Royall Liege) Accusing it, I put it on my Head, To try with it (as with an Enemie, That had before my face murdred my Father) The Quarrell of a true Inheritor. But if it did infect my blood with Ioy, Or swell my Thoughts, to any straine of Pride, If any Rebell, or vaine spirit of mine, Did, with the least Affection of a Welcome, Giue entertainment to the
might
of it, Let heauen, for euer, keepe it from my head, And make me, as the poorest Vassaile is, That doth with awe, and terror kneele to it.
O my Sonne! Heauen put it in thy minde to take it hence, That thou might'st ioyne the more, thy Fathers loue, Pleading so wisely, in excuse of it. Come hither
Harrie,
sit thou by my bedde, And heare (I thinke, the very latest Counsell That euer I shall breath: Heauen knowes, my Sonne) By what by-pathes, and indirect crook'd-wayes I met this Crowne: and I my selfe know well How troublesome it sate vpon my head. To thee, it shall descend with better Quiet, Better Opinion, better Confirmation: For all the soyle of the Atchieuement goes With me, into the Earth. It seem'd in mee, But as an Honour snatch'd with boyst'rous hand, And I had many liuing, to vpbraide My gaine of it, by their Assistances, Which dayly grew to Quarrell, and to Blood-shed, Wounding supposed Peace. All these bold Feares, Thou seest (with perill) I haue answered: For all my Reigne, hath beene but as a Scene Acting that argument. And now my death Changes the Moode: For what in me, was purchas'd, Falles vpon thee, in a more Fayrer sort. So thou, the Garland wear'st successiuely. Yet, though thou stand'st more sure, then I could do, Thou art not firme enough, since greefes are greene: And all thy Friends, which thou must make thy Friends Haue but their stings, and teeth, newly tak'n out, By whose fell working, I was first aduanc'd, And by whose power, I well might lodge a Feare To be againe displac'd. Which to auoyd, I cut them off: and had a purpose now To leade out many to the Holy Land; Least rest, and lying still, might make them looke Too neere vnto my State. Therefore (my
Harrie
) Be it thy course to busie giddy Mindes With Forraigne Quarrels: that Action hence borne out, May waste the memory of the former dayes. More would I, but my Lungs are wasted so, That strength of Speech it vtterly deni'de mee. How I came by the Crowne, O heauen forgiue: And grant it may, with thee, in true peace liue.
My gracious Liege: You wonne it, wore it: kept it, gaue it me, Then plaine and right must my possession be; Which I, with more, then with a Common paine, 'Gainst all the World, will rightfully maintaine.
Enter Lord Iohn of Lancaster, and Warwicke.
Looke, looke, Heere comes my
Iohn
of Lancaster:
Health, Peace, and Happinesse, To my Royall Father.
Thou bring'st me happinesse and Peace (Sonne
Iohn:
) But health (alacke) with youthfull wings is flowne From this bare, wither'd Trunke. Vpon thy sight My worldly businesse makes a period. Where is my Lord of Warwicke?
My Lord of Warwicke.
Doth any name particular, belong Vnto the Lodging, where I first did swoon'd?
'Tis call'd
Ierusalem,
my Noble Lord.
Laud be to heauen: Euen there my life must end. It hath beene prophesi'de to me many yeares, I should not dye, but in
Ierusalem:
Which (vainly) I suppos'd the Holy-Land. But beare me to that Chamber, there Ile lye: In that
Ierusalem,
shall
Harry
dye.
Exeunt.
Actus Quintus. Scoena Prima.
Enter Shallow, Silence, Falstaffe, Bardolfe, Page, and Dauie.
By Cocke and Pye, you shall not away to night. What
Dauy,
I say.
You must excuse me, M[aster].
Robert Shallow.
I will not excuse you: you shall not be excused. Excuses shall not be admitted: there is no excuse shall serue: you shall not be excus'd. Why
Dauie.
Heere sir.
Dauy, Dauy, Dauy,
let me see (
Dauy
) let me see:
William
Cooke, bid him come hither. Sir
Iohn,
you shal not be excus'd.
Marry sir, thus: those Precepts cannot bee seru'd: and againe sir, shall we sowe the head-land with Wheate?
With red Wheate
Dauy.
But for
William
Cook: are there no yong Pigeons?
Yes Sir. Heere is now the Smithes note, for Shooing, And Plough-Irons.
Let it be cast, and payde: Sir
Iohn,
you shall not be excus'd.
Sir, a new linke to the Bucket must needes bee had: And Sir, doe you meane to stoppe any of
Williams
Wages, about the Sacke he lost the other day, at
Hinckley
Fayre?
He shall answer it: Some Pigeons
Dauy,
a couple of short-legg'd Hennes: a ioynt of Mutton, and any pretty little tine Kickshawes, tell
William
Cooke.
Doth the man of Warre, stay all night sir?
Yes
Dauy:
I will vse him well. A Friend i'th Court, is better then a penny in purse. Vse his men well
Dauy,
for they are ar- rant Knaues, and will backe-bite.
No worse then they are bitten, sir: For they haue maruellous fowle linnen.
Well conceited
Dauy:
about thy Businesse,
Dauy
.
I beseech you sir, To countenance
William Visor
of Woncot, against
Cle- ment Perkes
of the hill.
There are many Complaints
Dauy,
against that
Visor,
that
Visor
is an arrant Knaue, on my know- ledge.
I graunt your Worship, that he is a knaue (Sir:) But yet heauen forbid Sir, but a Knaue should haue some Countenance, at his Friends request. An honest man sir, is able to speake for himselfe, when a Knaue is not. I haue seru'd your Worshippe truely sir, these eight yeares: and if I cannot once or twice in a Quarter beare out a knaue, against an honest man, I haue but a very litle credite with your Worshippe. The Knaue is mine honest Friend Sir, therefore I beseech your Worship, let him bee Counte-nanc'd.
Go
too
, I say he shall haue no wrong: Looke about
Dauy.
Where are you Sir
Iohn
? Come, off with your Boots. Giue me your hand M[aster].
Bardolfe.
I am glad to see your Worship.
I thanke thee, with all my heart, kinde Master
Bardolfe:
and welcome my tall Fellow: Come Sir
Iohn.
Ile follow you, good Master
Robert Shallow.
Bardolfe,
looke to our Horsses. If I were saw'de into Quantities, I should make foure dozen of such bearded Hermites staues, as Master
Shallow.
It is a wonderfull thing to see the semblable Coherence of his mens spirits, and his: They, by obseruing of him, do beare themselues like foolish Iustices: Hee, by conuersing with them, is turn'd into a Iustice-like Seruingman. Their spirits are so married in Coniunction, with the participation of So- ciety, that they flocke together in consent, like so ma- ny Wilde-Geese. If I had a suite to Mayster
Shallow,
I would humour his men, with the imputation of beeing neere their Mayster. If to his Men, I would currie with Maister
Shallow,
that no man could better command his Seruants. It is certaine, that either wise bearing, or ig- norant Carriage is caught, as men take diseases, one of another: therefore, let men take heede of their Compa- nie. I will deuise matter enough out of this
Shallow,
to keepe Prince
Harry
in continuall Laughter, the wearing out of sixe Fashions (which is foure Tearmes) or two Ac- tions, and he shall laugh with
Interuallums.
O it is much that a Lye (with a slight Oath) and a iest (with a sadde brow) will doe, with a Fellow, that neuer had the Ache in his shoulders. O you shall see him laugh, till his Face be like a wet Cloake,
ill
laid vp.
Sir
Iohn.
I come Master
Shallow,
I come Master
Shallow.
Exeunt
Scena Secunda.
Enter the Earle of Warwicke, and the Lord Chiefe Iustice.
How now, my Lord Chiefe Iustice, whe- ther away?
How doth the King?
Exceeding well: his Cares Are now, all ended.
I hope, not dead.
Hee's walk'd the way of Nature, And to our purposes, he liues no more.
I would his Maiesty had call'd me with him, The seruice, that I truly did his life, Hath left me open to all iniuries.
Indeed I thinke the yong King loues you not.
I know he doth not, and do arme my selfe To welcome the condition of the Time, Which cannot looke more hideously vpon me, Then I haue drawne it in my fantasie.
Enter Iohn of Lancaster, Gloucester, and Clarence.
Heere come the heauy Issue of dead
Harrie:
O, that the liuing
Harrie
had the temper Of him, the worst of these three Gentlemen: How many Nobles then, should hold their places, That must strike saile, to Spirits of vilde sort?
Alas, I feare, all will be ouer-turn'd.
Good morrow Cosin Warwick, good morrow.
Good morrow, Cosin.
We meet, like men, that had forgot to speake.
We do remember: but our Argument Is all too heauy, to admit much talke.
Well: Peace be with him, that hath made vs heauy
Peace be with vs, least we be heauier.
O, good my Lord, you haue lost a friend indeed: And I dare sweare, you borrow not that face Of seeming sorrow, it is sure your owne.
Though no man be assur'd what grace to finde, You stand in coldest expectation. I am the sorrier, would 'twere otherwise.
Wel, you must now speake Sir
Iohn Falstaffe
faire, Which swimmes against your streame of Quality.
Sweet Princes: what I did, I did in Honor, Led by th' Imperiall Conduct of my Soule, And neuer shall you see, that I will begge A ragged, and fore-stall'd Remission. If Troth, and vpright Innocency fayle me, Ile to the King (my Master) that is dead, And tell him, who hath sent me after him.
Heere comes the Prince.
Enter Prince Henrie.
Good morrow: and heauen saue your Maiesty
This new, and gorgeous Garment, Maiesty, Sits not so easie on me, as you thinke. Brothers, you mixe your Sadnesse with some Feare: This is the English, not the Turkish Court: Not
Amurah,
an
Amurah
succeeds, But
Harry, Harry:
Yet be sad (good Brothers) For (to speake truth) it very well becomes you: Sorrow, so Royally in you appeares, That I will deeply put the Fashion on, And weare it in my heart. Why then be sad, But entertaine no more of it (good Brothers) Then a ioynt burthen, laid vpon vs all. For me, by Heauen (I bid you be assur'd) Ile be your Father, and your Brother too: Let me but beare your Loue, Ile beare your Cares; But weepe that
Harrie
's dead, and so will I. But
Harry
liues, that shall conuert those Teares By number, into houres of Happinesse.
We hope no other from your Maiesty.
You all looke strangely on me: and you most, You are (I thinke) assur'd, I loue you not.
I am assur'd (if I be measur'd rightly) Your Maiesty hath no iust cause to hate mee.
No? How might a Prince of my great hopes forget So great Indignities you laid vpon me? What? Rate? Rebuke? and roughly send to Prison Th' immediate Heire of England? Was this easie? May this be wash'd in
Lethe,
and forgotten?
I then did vse the Person of your Father: The Image of his power, lay then in me, And in th' administration of his Law, Whiles I was busie for the Commonwealth, Your Highnesse pleased to forget my place, The Maiesty, and power of Law, and Iustice, The Image of the King, whom I presented, And strooke me in my very Seate of Iudgement: Whereon (as an Offender to your Father) I gaue bold way to my Authority, And did commit you. If the deed were
ill
, Be you contented, wearing now the Garland, To haue a Sonne, set your Decrees at naught? To plucke downe Iustice from your awefull Bench? To trip the course of Law, and blunt the Sword That guards the peace, and safety of your Person? Nay more, to spurne at your most Royall Image, And mocke your workings, in a Second body? Question your Royall Thoughts, make the case yours: Be now the Father, and propose a Sonne: Heare your owne dignity so much prophan'd, See your most dreadfull Lawes, so loosely slighted; Behold your selfe, so by a Sonne disdained: And then imagine me, taking your part, And in your power, soft silencing your Sonne: After this cold considerance, sentence me; And, as you are a King, speake in your State, What I haue done, that misbecame my place, My person, or my Lieges Soueraigntie.
You are right Iustice, and you weigh this well: Therefore still beare the Ballance, and the Sword: And I do wish your Honors may encrease, Till you do liue, to see a Sonne of mine Offend you, and obey you, as I did. So shall I liue, to speake my Fathers words: Happy am I, that haue a man so bold, That dares do Iustice, on my proper Sonne; And no lesse happy, hauing such a Sonne, That would deliuer vp his Greatnesse so, Into the hands of Iustice. You did commit me: For which, I do commit into your hand, Th' vnstained Sword that you haue vs'd to beare: With this Remembrance; That you vse the same With the like bold, iust, and impartiall spirit As you haue done 'gainst me. There is my hand, You shall be as a Father, to my Youth: My voice shall sound, as you do prompt mine eare, And I will stoope, and humble my Intents, To your well-practis'd, wise Directions. And Princes all, beleeue me, I beseech you: My Father is gone wilde into his Graue, (For in his Tombe, lye my Affections) And with his Spirits, sadly I suruiue, To mocke the expectation of the World; To frustrate Prophesies, and to race out Rotten Opinion, who hath writ me downe After my seeming. The Tide of Blood in me, Hath prowdly flow'd in Vanity, till now. Now doth it turne, and ebbe backe to the Sea, Where it shall mingle with the state of Floods, And flow henceforth in formall Maiesty. Now call we our High Court of Parliament, And let vs choose such Limbes of Noble Counsaile, That the great Body of our State may go In equall ranke, with the best gouern'd Nation, That Warre, or Peace, or both at once may be As things acquainted and familiar to vs, In which you (Father) shall haue formost hand. Our Coronation done, we will accite (As I before remembred) all our State, And heauen (consigning to my good intents) No Prince, nor Peere, shall haue iust cause to say, Heauen shorten
Harries
happy life, one day.
Exeunt.
Scena Tertia.
Enter Falstaffe, Shallow, Silence, Bardolfe, Page, and Pistoll.
Nay, you shall see mine Orchard: where, in an Arbor we will eate a last yeares Pippin of my owne graf- fing, with a dish of Carrawayes, and so forth. (Come Co- sin
Silence,
and then to bed.
You haue heere a goodly dwelling, and a rich.
Barren, barren, barren: Beggers all, beggers all Sir
Iohn:
Marry, good ayre. Spread
Dauy,
spread
Dauie:
Well said
Dauie.
This
Dauie
serues you for good vses: he is your Seruingman, and your Husband.
A good Varlet, a good Varlet, a very good Var- let, Sir
Iohn:
I haue drunke too much Sacke at Supper. A good Varlet. Now sit downe, now sit downe: Come Cosin.
Ah sirra (quoth-a) we shall doe nothing but eate, and make good cheere, and praise heauen for the merrie yeere: when flesh is cheape, and Females deere, and lustie Lads rome heere, and there: so merrily, and euer among so merrily.
There's a merry heart, good M[aster].
Silence,
Ile giue you a health for that anon.
Good M[aster].
Bardolfe:
some wine,
Dauie.
Sweet sir, sit: Ile be with you anon: most sweete sir, sit. Master Page, good M[aster]. Page, sit: Proface. What you want in meate, wee'l haue in drinke: but you beare, the heart's all.
Be merry M[aster].
Bardolfe,
and my little Souldiour there, be merry.
Be merry, be merry, my wife ha's all. For women are Shrewes, both short, and tall: 'Tis merry in Hall, when Beards wagge all; And welcome merry Shrouetide. Be merry, be merry.
I did not thinke M[aster].
Silence
had bin a man of this Mettle.
Who I? I haue beene merry twice and once, ere now.
There is a dish of Lether-coats for you.
Dauie.
Your Worship: Ile be with you straight. A cup of Wine, sir?
A Cup of Wine, that's briske and fine, & drinke vnto the Leman mine: and a merry heart liues long-a.
Well said, M[aster].
Silence.
If we shall be merry, now comes in the sweete of the night.
Health, and long life to you, M[aster].
Silence.
Fill the Cuppe, and let it come. Ile pledge you a mile to the bottome.
Honest
Bardolfe,
welcome: If thou want'st any thing, and wilt not call, beshrew thy heart. Welcome my little tyne theefe, and welcome indeed too: Ile drinke to M[aster].
Bardolfe,
and to all the Cauileroes about London.
I hope to see London, once ere I die.
If I might see you there,
Dauie.
You'l cracke a quart together? Ha, will you not M[aster].
Bardolfe
?
Yes Sir, in a pottle pot.
I thanke thee: the knaue will sticke by thee, I can assure thee that. He will not out, he is true bred.
And Ile sticke by him, sir.
Why there spoke a King: lack nothing, be merry. Looke, who's at doore there, ho: who knockes?
Why now you haue done me right.
Do me right, and dub me Knight,
Samingo.
Is't not so?
'Tis so.
Is't so? Why then say an old man can do somwhat.
If it please your Worshippe, there's one
Pistoll
come from the Court with newes.
From the Court? Let him come in.
Enter Pistoll.
How now Pistoll?
Sir
Iohn,
'saue you sir.
What winde blew you hither, Pistoll?
Not the
ill
winde which blowes none to good, sweet Knight: Thou art now one of the greatest men in the Realme.
Indeed, I thinke he bee, but Goodman
Puffe
of Barson.
Puffe? puffe in thy teeth, most recreant Coward base. Sir
Iohn,
I am thy Pistoll, and thy Friend: helter skelter haue I rode to thee, and tydings do I bring, and luckie ioyes, and golden Times, and happie Newes of price.
I prethee now deliuer them, like a man of this World.
A footra for the World, and Worldlings base, I speake of Affrica, and Golden ioyes.
O base Assyrian Knight, what is thy newes? Let King
Couitha
know the truth thereof.
And Robin-hood, Scarlet, and Iohn.
Shall dunghill Curres confront the
Hellicons
? And shall good newes be baffel'd? Then Pistoll lay thy head in Furies lappe.
Honest Gentleman, I know not your breeding.
Why then Lament therefore.
Giue me pardon, Sir. If sir, you come with news from the Court, I take it, there is but two wayes, either to vtter them, or to conceale them. I am Sir, vnder the King, in some Authority.
Vnder which King?
Bezonian,
speake, or dye.
Vnder King
Harry.
Harry
the Fourth? or Fift?
Harry
the Fourth.
A footra for thine Office. Sir
Iohn,
thy tender Lamb-kinne, now is King,
Harry
the Fift's the man, I speake the truth. When Pistoll lyes, do this, and figge-me, like The bragging Spaniard.
What, is the old King dead?
As naile in doore. The things I speake, are iust.
Away
Bardolfe,
Sadle my Horse, Master
Robert Shallow,
choose what Office thou wilt In the Land, 'tis thine.
Pistol,
I will double charge thee With Dignities.
O ioyfull day: I would not take a Knighthood for my Fortune.
What? I do bring good newes.
Carrie Master
Silence
to bed: Master
Shallow,
my Lord
Shallow,
be what thou wilt, I am Fortunes Steward. Get on thy Boots, wee'l ride all night. Oh sweet Pistoll: Away
Bardolfe:
Come Pistoll, vtter more to mee: and withall deuise something to do thy selfe good. Boote, boote Master
Shallow,
I know the young King is sick for mee. Let vs take any mans Horsses: The Lawes of Eng- land are at my command'ment. Happie are they, which haue beene my Friendes: and woe vnto my Lord Chiefe Iustice.
Let Vultures vil'de seize on his Lungs also: Where is the life that late I led, say they? Why heere it is, welcome those pleasant dayes.
Exeunt
Scena Quarta.
Enter Hostesse Quickly, Dol Teare- sheete, and Beadles.
No, thou arrant knaue: I would I might dy, that I might haue thee hang'd: Thou hast drawne my shoulder out of ioynt.
The Constables haue deliuer'd her ouer to mee: and shee shall haue Whipping cheere enough, I warrant her. There hath beene a man or two (lately) kill'd about her.
Nut-hooke, nut-hooke, you Lye: Come on, Ile tell thee what, thou damn'd Tripe-visag'd Rascall, if the Childe I now go with, do miscarrie, thou had'st better thou had'st strooke thy Mother, thou Paper-fac'd Vil- laine.
O that Sir
Iohn
were come, hee would make this a bloody day to some body. But I would the Fruite of her Wombe might miscarry.
If it do, you shall haue a dozen of Cushions againe, you haue but eleuen now. Come, I charge you both go with me: for the man is dead, that you and Pi- stoll beate among you.
Ile tell thee what, thou thin man in a Censor; I will haue you as soundly swindg'd for this, you blew-Bottel'd Rogue: you filthy famish'd Correctioner, if you be not swing'd, Ile forsweare halfe Kirtles.
Come, come, you shee-Knight-arrant, come.
O, that right should thus o'recome
might
. Wel of sufferance, comes ease.
Come you Rogue, come: Bring me to a Iustice.
Yes, come you staru'd Blood-hound.
Goodman death, goodman Bones.
Thou Anatomy, thou.
Come you thinne Thing: Come you Rascall.
Very well.
Exeunt.
Scena Quinta.
Enter two Groomes.
More Rushes, more Rushes.
The Trumpets haue sounded twice.
It will be two of the Clocke, ere they come from the Coronation.
Exit Groo.
Enter Falstaffe, Shallow, Pistoll, Bardolfe, and Page.
Stand heere by me, M[aster].
Robert Shallow,
I will make the King do you Grace. I will leere vpon him, as he comes by: and do but marke the countenance that hee will giue me.
Blesse thy Lungs, good Knight.
Come heere
Pistol,
stand behind me. O if I had had time to haue made new Liueries, I would haue be- stowed the thousand pound I borrowed of you. But it is no matter, this poore shew doth better: this doth inferre the zeale I had to see him.
It doth so.
It shewes my earnestnesse in affection.
It doth so.
My deuotion.
It doth, it doth, it doth.
As it were, to ride day and night, And not to deliberate, not to remember, Not to haue patience to shift me.
It is most certaine.
But to stand stained with Trauaile, and sweating with desire to see him, thinking of nothing else, putting all affayres in obliuion, as if there were nothing els to bee done, but to see him.
'Tis
semper idem:
for
obsque hoc nihil est.
'Tis all in euery part.
'Tis so indeed.
My Knight, I will enflame thy Noble Liuer, and make thee rage. Thy
Dol,
and
Helen
of thy noble thoghts is in base Durance, and contagious prison: Hall'd thi- ther by most Mechanicall and durty hand. Rowze vppe Reuenge from Ebon den, with fell Alecto's Snake, for
Dol
is in. Pistol, speakes nought but troth.
I will deliuer her.
There roar'd the Sea: and Trumpet Clangour sounds.
The Trumpets sound. Enter King Henrie the Fift, Brothers, Lord Chiefe Iustice.
Saue thy Grace, King
Hall,
my Royall
Hall.
The heauens thee guard, and keepe, most royall Impe of Fame.
'Saue thee my sweet Boy.
My Lord Chiefe Iustice, speake to that vaine man.
Haue you your wits? Know you what 'tis you speake?
My King, my Ioue; I speake to thee, my heart.
I know thee not, old man: Fall to thy Prayers: How
ill
white haires become a Foole, and Iester? I haue long dream'd of such a kinde of man, So surfeit-swell'd, so old, and so prophane: But being awake, I do despise my dreame. Make lesse thy body (hence) and more thy Grace, Leaue gourmandizing; Know the Graue doth gape For thee, thrice wider then for other men. Reply not to me, with a Foole-borne Iest, Presume not, that I am the thing I was, For heauen doth know (so shall the world perceiue) That I haue turn'd away my former Selfe, So will I those that kept me Companie. When thou dost heare I am, as I haue bin, Approach me, and thou shalt be as thou was't The Tutor and the Feeder of my Riots: Till then, I banish thee, on paine of death, As I haue done the rest of my Misleaders, Not to come neere our Person, by ten mile. For competence of life, I will allow you, That lacke of meanes enforce you not to euill: And as we heare you do reforme your selues, We will according to your strength, and qualities, Giue you aduancement. Be it your charge (my Lord) To see perform'd the tenure of our word. Set on.
Exit King.
Master
Shallow,
I owe you a thousand pound.
I
marry Sir
Iohn,
which I beseech you to let me haue home with me.
That can hardly be, M[aster].
Shallow,
do not you grieue at this: I shall be sent for in priuate to him: Looke you, he must seeme thus to the world: feare not your aduance- ment: I will be the man yet, that shall make you great.
I cannot well perceiue how, vnlesse you should giue me your Doublet, and stuffe me out with Straw. I beseech you, good Sir
Iohn,
let mee haue fiue hundred of my thousand.
Sir, I will be as good as my word. This that you heard, was but a colour.
A colour I feare, that you will dye in, Sir
Iohn.
Feare no colours, go with me to dinner: Come Lieutenant
Pistol,
come
Bardolfe,
I shall be sent for soone at night.
Go carry Sir
Iohn Falstaffe
to the Fleete, Take all his Company along with him.
My Lord, my Lord.
I cannot now speake, I will heare you soone: Take them away.
Si fortuna me tormento, spera me contento.
Exit. Manent Lancaster and Chiefe Iustice.
I like this faire proceeding of the Kings: He hath intent his wonted Followers Shall all be very well prouided for: But all are banisht, till their conuersations Appeare more wise, and modest to the world.
And so they are.
The King hath call'd his Parliament, My Lord.
He hath.
I will lay oddes, that ere this yeere expire, We beare our Ciuill Swords, and Natiue fire As farre as France. I heare a Bird so sing, Whose Musicke (to my thinking) pleas'd the King. Come, will you hence?
Exeunt
FINIS.
EPILOGVE.
First, my Feare: then, my Curtsie: last, my Speech.
My Feare, is your Displeasure: My Curtsie, my Dutie:
And my speech, to Begge your Pardons. If you looke for a
good speech now, you vndoe me: For what I haue to say, is
of mine owne making: and what (indeed) I should say, will
(
I doubt) prooue mine owne marring. But to the Purpose,
and so to the Venture. Be it knowne to you (as it is very
well) I was lately heere in the end of a displeasing Play, to pray your Patien {for it, and to promise you a Better: I did meane (indeede) to pay you with thi {which if (like an
ill
Venture) it come vnluckily home, I breake; and you, my {Creditors lose. Heere I promist you I would be, and heere I commit my Bodie
to your Mercies: Bate me some, and I will pay you some, and (as most Debtors d {promise you infinitely.
If my Tongue cannot entreate you to acquit me: will you command me to vse
my Legges? And yet that were but light payment, to Dance out of your debt: But {a good Conscience, will make any possible satisfaction, and so will I. All the {heere haue forgiuen me, if the Gentlemen will not, then the Gentlemen
do not agree with the Gentlewomen, which was neuer seene before, in such an As {One word more, I beseech you: if you be not too much cloid with Fat Meate,
our humble Author will continue the Story (with
Sir Iohn
in it) and make yo {merry, with faire
Katherine
of
France:
where (for any thing I know
) Fal- s
shall dye of a sweat, vnlesse already he be kill'd with your hard Opinions:
For
Old-Castle
dyed a Martyr, and this is not the man. My Tongue is wearie
when my Legs are too, I will bid you good night; and so kneele downe before yo {But (indeed) to pray for the Queene.
