Loues Labour's lost.
Actus primus.
Enter Ferdinand King of Nauarre, Berowne, Longauill, and Dumane.
Let
Fame,
that all hunt after in their liues, Liue registred vpon our brazen Tombes, And then grace vs in the disgrace of death: when spight of cormorant deuouring Time, Th' endeuour of this present breath may buy: That honour which shall bate his sythes keene edge, And make vs heyres of all eternitie. Therefore braue Conquerours, for so you are, That warre against your owne affections, And the huge Armie of the worlds desires. Our late edict shall strongly stand in force,
Nauar
shall be the wonder of the world. Our Court shall be a little Achademe, Still and contemplatiue in liuing
Art
. You three,
Berowne, Dumaine,
and
Longauill,
Haue sworne for three yeeres terme, to liue with me: My fellow Schollers, and to keepe those statutes That are recorded in this scedule heere. Your oathes are past, and now subscribe your names: That his owne hand may strike his honour downe, That violates the smallest branch heerein: If you are arm'd to doe, as sworne to do, Subscribe to your deepe oathes, and keepe it
to
.
I am resolu'd, 'tis but a three yeeres fast: The minde shall banquet, though the body pine, Fat paunches haue leane pates: and dainty bits, Make rich the ribs, but bankerout the wits.
My louing Lord,
Dumane
is mortified, The grosser manner of these worlds delights, He throwes vpon the grosse worlds baser slaues: To loue, to wealth, to pompe, I pine and die, With all these liuing in Philosophie.
I can but say their protestation ouer, So much, deare Liege, I haue already sworne, That is, to liue and study heere three yeeres. But there are other strict obseruances: As not to see a woman in that terme, Which I hope well is not enrolled there. And one day in a weeke to touch no foode: And but one meale on euery day beside: The which I hope is not enrolled there. And then to sleepe but three houres in the night, And not be seene to winke of all the day. When I was wont to thinke no harme all night, And make a darke night too of halfe the day: Which I hope well is not enrolled there. O, these are barren taskes, too hard to keepe, Not to see Ladies, study, fast, not sleepe.
Your oath is past, to passe away from these.
Let me say no my Liedge,
and
if you please, I onely swore to study with your grace, And stay heere in your Court for three yeeres space.
You swore to that
Berowne,
and to the rest.
By yea and nay sir, than I swore in iest. What is the end of study, let me know?
Why that to know which else wee should not know.
Things hid & bard (you meane) fro[m] co[m]mon sense.
I
, that is studies god-like recompence.
Come on then, I will sweare to studie so, To know the thing I am forbid to know: As thus, to study where I well may dine, When I to fast expressely am forbid. Or studie where to meete some Mistresse fine, When Mistresses from common sense are hid. Or hauing sworne too hard a keeping oath, Studie to breake it, and not breake my troth. If studies gaine be thus, and this be so, Studie knowes that which yet it doth not know, Sweare me to this, and I will nere say no.
These be the stops that hinder studie quite, And traine our intellects to vaine delight.
Why? all delights are vaine, and that most vaine Which with paine purchas'd, doth inherit paine, As painefully to poare vpon a Booke, To seeke the light of truth, while truth the while Doth falsely blinde the eye-sight of his looke: Light seeking light, doth light of light beguile: So ere you finde where light in darkenesse lies, Your light growes darke by losing of your eyes. Studie me how to please the eye indeede, By fixing it vpon a fairer eye, Who dazling so, that eye shall be his heed, And giue him light that it was blinded by. Studie is like the heauens glorious Sunne, That will not be deepe search'd with sawcy lookes: Small haue continuall plodders euer wonne, Saue base authoritie from others Bookes. These earthly Godfathers of heauens lights, That giue a name to euery fixed Starre, Haue no more profit of their shining nights, Then those that walke and wot not what they are. Too much to know, is to know nought but fame: And euery Godfather can giue a name.
How well hee's read, to reason against reading.
Proceeded well, to stop all good proceeding.
Hee weedes the corne, and still lets grow the weeding.
The Spring is neare when greene geesse are
a
breeding.
How followes that?
Fit in his place and time.
In reason nothing.
Something then in rime.
Berowne
is like an enuious sneaping Frost, That bites the first borne infants of the Spring.
Wel, say I am, why should proud Summer boast, Before the Birds haue any cause to sing? Why should I ioy in any abortiue birth? At Christmas I no more desire a Rose, Then wish a Snow in Mayes new fangled showes: But like of each thing that in season growes. So you to studie now it is too late, That were to clymbe ore the house to vnlocke the gate.
Well, sit you out: go home
Berowne:
adue.
No my good Lord, I haue sworn to stay with you. And though I haue for barbarisme spoke more, Then for that Angell knowledge you can say, Yet confident Ile keepe what I haue sworne, And bide the pennance of each three yeares day. Giue me the paper, let me reade the same, And to the strictest decrees Ile write my name.
How well this yeelding rescues thee from shame.
Item.
That no woman shall come within a mile of my Court. Hath this bin proclaimed?
Foure dayes agoe.
Let's see the penaltie. On paine of loosing her tongue. Who deuis'd this penaltie?
Marry that did I.
Sweete Lord, and why?
To fright them hence with that dread penaltie, A dangerous law against gentilitie.
Item,
If any man be seene to talke with a woman with- in the tearme of three yeares, hee shall indure such publique shame as the rest of the Court shall possibly deuise.
This Article my Liedge your selfe must breake, For well you know here comes in Embassie The
French
Kings daughter, with your selfe to speake: A Maide of grace and compleate maiestie, About surrender vp of
Aquitaine:
To her decrepit, sicke, and bed-rid Father. Therefore this Article is made in vaine, Or vainly comes th' admired Princesse hither.
What say you Lords? Why, this was quite forgot.
So Studie euermore is ouershot, While it doth study to haue what it would, It doth forget to doe the thing it should: And when it hath the thing it hunteth most, 'Tis won as townes with fire, so won, so lost.
We must of force dispence with this Decree, She must lye here on meere necessitie.
Necessity will make vs all forsworne Three thousand times within this three yeeres space: For euery man with his affects is borne, Not by
might
mastred, but by speciall grace. If I breake faith, this word shall breake for me, I am forsworne on meere necessitie. So to the Lawes at large I write my name, And he that breakes them in the least degree, Stands in attainder of eternall shame. Suggestions are to others as to me: But I beleeue although I seeme so loth, I am the last that will last keepe his oth. But is there no quicke recreation granted?
I
that there is, our Court you know is hanted With a refined trauailer of
Spaine,
A man in all the worlds new fashion planted, That hath a mint of phrases in his braine: One, who the musicke of his owne vaine tongue, Doth rauish like inchanting harmonie: A man of complements whom right and wrong Haue chose as vmpire of their mutinie. This childe of fancie that
Armado
hight, For interim to our studies shall relate, In high-borne words the worth of many a Knight: From tawnie
Spaine
lost in the worlds debate. How you delight my Lords, I know not I, But I protest I loue to heare him lie, And I will vse him for my Minstrelsie.
Armado
is a most illustrious wight, A man of fire, new words, fashions owne Knight.
Costard
the swaine and he, shall be our sport, And so to studie, three yeeres is but short.
Enter a Constable with Costard with a Letter.
Which is the Dukes owne person.
This fellow, What would'st?
I my selfe reprehend his owne person, for I am his graces Tharborough: But I would see his own person in flesh and blood.
This is he.
Signeor
Arme, Arme
commends you: Ther's villanie abroad, this letter will tell you more.
Sir the Contempts thereof are as touching mee.
A letter from the magnificent
Armado.
How low soeuer the matter, I hope in God for high words.
A high hope for a low heauen, God grant vs pa- tience.
To heare, or forbeare hearing.
To heare meekely sir, and to laugh moderately, or to forbeare both.
Well sir, be it as the stile shall giue vs cause to clime in the merrinesse.
The matter is to me sir, as concerning
Iaquenetta.
The manner of it is, I was taken with the manner.
In what manner?
In manner and forme following sir all those three. I was seene with her in the Mannor house, sitting with her vpon the Forme, and taken following her into the Parke: which put to gether, is in manner and forme following. Now sir for the manner; It is the manner of a man to speake to a woman, for the forme in some forme.
For the following sir.
As it shall follow in my correction, and God de- fend the right.
Will you heare this Letter with attention?
As we would heare an Oracle.
Such is the simplicitie of man to harken after the flesh.
Great Deputie, the Welkins Vicegerent, and sole domi- nator
 
of
Nauar,
my soules earths God, and bodies fo- string patrone:
Not a word of
Costard
yet.
So it is.
It may be so: but if he say it is so, he is in telling true: but so.
Peace,
Be to me, and euery man that dares not fight.
No words,
Of other mens secrets I beseech you.
So it is besieged with sable coloured melancholie, I
did commend the blacke oppressing humour to the most whole- some
 
Physicke of thy health-giuing ayre: And as I am a Gen- tleman
,
betooke my selfe to walke: the time
When
? about the
sixt houre, When beasts most grase, birds best pecke, and men
sit downe to that nourishment which is called supper: So much
for the time
When
. Now for the ground
Which
? which I
meane I walkt vpon, it is ycliped, Thy Parke. Then for the
place
Where
? where I meane I did encounter that obscene and
most preposterous euent that draweth from my snow-white pen
the ebon coloured Inke, which heere thou viewest, beholdest:
suruayest, or seest. But to the place
Where
? It standeth
North North-east and by East from the West corner of thy
curious knotted garden; There did I see that low spiri- ted
Swaine, that base Minow of thy myrth,
(
Mee?)
that vnletered small knowing soule,
(
Me?)
that shallow
vassall
(
Still mee?)
which as I remember, hight
Co- stard, (
O me)
sorted and consorted contrary to thy e-stablished
proclaymed Edict and Continent, Cannon: Which with, o with, but with this I passion to say wherewith:
With a Wench.
With a childe of our Grandmother
Eue,
a female;
or for thy more sweet understanding a woman: him, I (as my
euer esteemed dutie prickes me on) haue sent to thee, to receiue
the meed of punishment by the sweet Graces Officer
Anthony Dull,
a man of good repute, carriage, bearing, & estimation.
Me, an't shall please you? I am
Anthony Dull.
For
Iaquenetta
(so is the weaker vessell called)
which I apprehended with the aforesaid Swaine, I keepe her
as a vessell of thy Lawes furie, and shall at the least of thy
sweet notice, bring her to triall. Thine in all complements of deuoted and heart-burning heat of dutie.
Don
Adriana de Armado.
This is not so well as I looked for, but the best that euer I heard.
I
the best, for the worst. But sirra, What say you to this?
Sir I confesse the Wench.
Did you heare the Proclamation?
I doe confesse much of the hearing it, but little of the marking of it.
It was proclaimed a yeeres imprisonment to bee taken with a Wench.
I was taken with none sir, I was taken with a Damosell.
Well, it was proclaimed Damosell.
This was no Damosell neyther sir, shee was a Virgin.
It is so varried
to
, for it was proclaimed Virgin.
If it were, I denie her Virginitie: I was taken with a Maide.
This Maid will not serue your turne sir.
This Maide will serue my turne sir.
Sir I will pronounce your sentence: You shall fast a Weeke with Branne and water.
I had rather pray a Moneth with Mutton and Porridge.
And
Don
Armado
shall be your keeper. My Lord
Berowne,
see him deliuer'd ore, And goe we Lords to put in practice that, Which each to other hath so strongly sworne.
Ile lay my head to any good mans hat, These oathes and lawes will proue an idle scorne. Sirra, come on.
I suffer for the truth sir: for true it is, I was ta- ken with
Iaquenetta,
and
Iaquenetta
is a true girle, and therefore welcome the sowre cup of prosperitie, afflicti- on may one day smile againe, and vntill then sit downe sorrow.
Exit.
Enter Armado and Moth his Page.
Boy, What signe is it when a man of great spirit growes melancholy?
A great signe sir, that he will looke sad.
Why? sadnesse is one and the selfe-same thing deare impe.
No no, O Lord sir no.
How canst thou part sadnesse and melancholy my tender
Iuuenall
?
By a familiar demonstration of the working, my tough signeur.
Why tough signeur? Why tough signeur?
Why tender
Iuuenall
? Why tender
Iuuenall
?
I spoke it tender
Iuuenall,
as a congruent apa- thaton, appertaining to thy young daies, which we may nominate tender.
And I tough signeur, as an appertinent title to your olde time, which we may name tough.
Pretty and apt.
How meane you sir, I pretty, and my saying apt? or I apt, and my saying prettie?
Thou pretty because little.
Little pretty, because little: wherefore apt?
And therefore apt, because quicke.
Speake you this in my praise Master?
In thy condigne praise.
I will praise an Eele with the same praise.
What? that an Eele is ingenuous.
That an Eele is quicke.
I doe say thou art quicke in answeres. Thou heat'st my bloud.
I am answer'd sir.
I loue not to be crost.
He speakes the meere contrary, crosses loue not
him
.
I haue promis'd to study iij. yeres with the Duke.
You may doe it in an houre sir.
Impossible.
How many is one thrice told?
I am
ill
at reckning, it fits the spirit of a Tapster.
You are a gentleman and a gamester sir.
I confesse both, they are both the varnish of a compleat man.
Then I am sure you know how much the grosse summe of deus-ace amounts to.
It doth amount to one more then two.
Which the base vulgar call three.
True.
Why sir is this such a peece of study? Now here's three studied, ere you'll thrice wink, & how easie it is to put yeres to the word three, and study three yeeres in two words, the dancing horse will tell you.
A most fine Figure.
To proue you a Cypher.
I will heereupon confesse I am in loue: and as it is base for a Souldier to loue; so am I in loue with a base wench. If drawing my sword against the humour of affection, would deliuer mee from the reprobate thought of it, I would take Desire prisoner, and ransome him to any French Courtier for a new deuis'd curtsie. I thinke scorne to sigh, me thinkes I should out-sweare
Cupid.
Comfort me Boy, What great men haue beene in loue?
Hercules
Master.
Most sweete
Hercules:
more authority deare Boy, name more; and sweet my childe let them be men of good repute and carriage.
Sampson
Master, he was a man of good carriage, great carriage: for hee carried the Towne-gates on his backe like a Porter: and he was in loue.
O well-knit
Sampson,
strong ioynted
Sampson;
I doe excell thee in my rapier, as much as thou didst mee in carrying gates. I am in loue too. Who was
Sampsons
loue my deare
Moth
?
A Woman, Master.
Of what complexion?
Of all the foure, or the three, or the two, or one of the foure.
Tell me precisely of what complexion?
Of the sea-water Greene sir.
Is that one of the foure complexions?
As I haue read sir, and the best of them too.
Greene indeed is the colour of Louers: but to haue a Loue of that colour, methinkes
Sampson
had small reason for it. He surely affected her for her wit.
It was so sir, for she had a greene wit.
My Loue is most immaculate white and red.
Most immaculate thoughts Master, are mask'd vnder such colours.
Define, define, well educated infant.
My fathers witte, and my mothers tongue assist mee.
Sweet inuocation of a childe, most pretty and patheticall.
If shee be made of white and red, Her faults will nere be knowne: For blush-in cheekes by faults are bred, And feares by pale white showne: Then if she feare, or be to blame, By this you shall not know, For still her cheekes possesse the same, Which natiue she doth owe: A dangerous rime master against the reason of white and redde.
Is there not a ballet Boy, of the King and the Begger?
The world was very guilty of such a Ballet some three ages since, but I thinke now 'tis not to be found: or if it were, it would neither serue for the writing, nor the tune.
I will haue that subiect newly writ ore, that I may example my digression by some mighty president. Boy, I doe loue that Countrey girle that I tooke in the Parke with the rationall hinde
Costard:
she deserues well.
To bee whip'd: and yet a better loue then my Master.
Sing Boy, my spirit grows heauy in loue.
And that's great maruell, louing a light wench.
I say sing.
Forbeare till this company be past.
Enter Clowne, Constable, and Wench.
Sir, the Dukes pleasure, is that you keepe
Co-stard
safe, and you must let him take no delight, nor no penance, but hee must fast three daies a weeke: for this Damsell, I must keepe her at the Parke, shee is alowd for the Day-woman. Fare you well.
Exit.
I do betray my selfe with blushing: Maide.
Man.
I wil visit thee at the Lodge.
That's here by.
I know where it is situate.
Lord how wise you are!
I will tell thee wonders.
With what face?
I loue thee.
So I heard you say.
And so farewell.
Faire weather after you.
Come
Iaquenetta,
away.
Exeunt.
Villaine, thou shalt fast for thy offences ere thou be pardoned.
Well sir, I hope when I doe it, I shall doe it on a full stomacke.
Thou shalt be heauily punished.
I am more bound to you then your fellowes, for they are but lightly rewarded.
Take away this villaine, shut him vp.
Come you transgressing slaue, away.
Let mee not bee pent vp sir, I will fast being loose.
No sir, that were fast and loose: thou shalt to prison.
Well, if euer I do see the merry dayes of deso- lation that I haue seene, some shall see.
What shall some see?
Nay nothing, Master
Moth,
but what they looke vpon. It is not for prisoners to be silent in their words, and therefore I will say nothing: I thanke God, I haue as little patience as another man, and therefore I can be quiet.
Exit.
I doe affect the very ground (which is base) where her shooe (which is baser) guided by her foote (which is basest) doth tread. I shall be forsworn (which is a great argument of falshood) if I loue. And how can that be true loue, which is falsly attempted? Loue is a fa- miliar, Loue is a Diuell. There is no euill Angell but Loue, yet
Sampson
was so tempted, and he had an excel- lent strength: Yet was
Salomon
so seduced, and hee had a very good witte.
Cupids
Butshaft is too hard for
Her-cules
Clubbe, and therefore too much ods for a Spa- niards Rapier: The first and second cause will not serue my turne: the
Passado
hee respects not, the
Duello
he regards not; his disgrace is to be called Boy, but his glorie is to subdue men. Adue Valour, rust Rapier, bee still Drum, for your manager is in loue; yea hee loueth. Assist me some extemporall god of Rime, for I am sure I shall turne Sonnet. Deuise Wit, write Pen, for I am for whole volumes in folio.
Exit.
Finis Actus Primus.
Actus Secunda.
Enter the Princesse of France, with three attending Ladies, and three Lords.
Now Madam summon vp your dearest spirits, Consider who the King your father sends: To whom he sends, and what's his Embassie. Your selfe, held precious in the worlds esteeme, To parlee with the sole inheritour Of all perfections that a man may owe, Matchlesse
Nauarre,
the plea of no lesse weight Then
Aquitaine,
a Dowrie for a Queene, Be now as prodigall of all deare grace, As Nature was in making Graces deare, When she did starue the generall world beside, And prodigally gaue them all to you.
Good L[ord].
Boyet,
my beauty though but mean, Needs not the painted flourish of your praise: Beauty is bought by iudgement of the eye, Not vttred by base sale of chapmens tongues: I am lesse proud to heare you tell my worth, Then you much willing to be counted wise, In spending your wit in the praise of mine. But now to taske the tasker, good
Boyet.
You are not ignorant all-telling fame Doth noyse abroad
Nauar
hath made a vow, Till painefull studie shall out-weare three yeares, No woman may approach his silent Court: Therefore to's seemeth it a needfull course, Before we enter his forbidden gates, To know his pleasure, and in that behalfe Bold of your worthinesse, we single you, As our best mouing faire soliciter: Tell him, the daughter of the King of France, On serious businesse crauing quicke dispatch, Importunes personall conference with his grace. Haste, signifie so much while we attend, Like humble visag'd suters his high
will
.
Proud of imployment, willingly I goe.
Exit.
All pride is willing pride, and yours is so: Who are the Votaries my Louing Lords, that are vow-fellowes with this vertuous Duke?
Longauill
is one.
Know you the man?
I know him Madame at a marriage feast, Betweene L[ord].
Perigort
and the beautious heire Of
Iaques Fauconbridge
solemnized. In
Normandie
saw I this
Longauill,
A man of soueraigne parts he is esteem'd: Well fitted in Arts, glorious in Armes: Nothing becomes him
ill
that he would well. The onely soyle of his faire vertues glosse, If vertues glosse will staine with any soile, Is a sharp wit match'd with too blunt a
Will
: Whose edge hath power to cut whose
will
still wills, It should none spare that come within his power.
Some merry mocking Lord belike, ist so?
They say so most, that most his humors know.
such short liu'd wits do wither as they grow. Who are the rest?
The yong
Dumaine,
a well accomplisht youth, Of all that Vertue loue, for Vertue loued. Most power to doe most harme, least knowing
ill
: For he hath wit to make an
ill
shape good, And shape to win grace though she had no wit. I saw him at the Duke
Alansoes
once, And much too little of that good I saw, Is my report to his great worthinesse.
Another of these Students at that time, Was there with him, as I haue heard a truth.
Berowne
they call him, but a merrier man, Within the limit of becomming mirth, I neuer spent an houres talke withall. His eye begets occasion for his wit, For euery obiect that the one doth catch, The other turnes to a mirth-mouing iest. Which his faire tongue (conceits expositor) Deliuers in such apt and gracious words, That aged eares play treuant at his tales, And yonger hearings are quite rauished. So sweet and voluble is his discourse.
God blesse my Ladies, are they all in loue? That euery one her owne hath garnished, With such bedecking ornaments of praise.
Heere comes
Boyet.
Enter Boyet.
Now, what admittance Lord?
Nauar
had notice of your faire approach; And he and his competitors in oath, Were all addrest to meete you gentle Lady Before I came: Marrie thus much I haue learnt, He rather meanes to lodge you in the field, Like one that comes heere to besiege his Court, Then seeke a dispensation for his oath: To let you enter his vnpeopled house.
Enter Nauar, Longauill, Dumaine, and Berowne.
Heere comes
Nauar.
Faire Princesse, welcom to the Court of
Nauar.
Faire I giue you backe againe, and welcome I haue not yet: the roofe of this Court is too high to bee yours, and welcome to the wide fields, too base to be mine.
You shall be welcome Madam to my Court.
I wil be welcome then, Conduct me thither.
Heare me deare Lady, I haue sworne an oath.
Our Lady helpe my Lord, he'll be forsworne.
Not for the world faire Madam, by my
will
.
Why,
will
shall breake it
will
, and nothing els.
Your Ladiship is ignorant what it is.
Were my Lord so, his ignorance were wise, Where now his knowledge must proue ignorance. I heare your grace hath sworne out House-keeping: 'Tis deadly sinne to keepe that oath my Lord, And sinne to breake it: But pardon me, I am too sodaine bold, To teach a Teacher
ill
beseemeth me. Vouchsafe to read the purpose of my comming, And sodainly resolue me in my suite.
Madam, I will, if sodainly I may.
You will the sooner that I were away, For you'll proue periur'd if you make me stay.
Did not I dance with you in
Brabant
once?
Did not I dance with you in
Brabant
once?
I know you did.
How needlesse was it then to ask the question?
You must not be so quicke.
'Tis long of you
spur me with such questions.
Your wit's too hot, it speeds too fast, 'twill tire.
Not till it leaue the Rider in the mire.
What time
a
day?
The howre that fooles should aske.
Now faire befall your maske.
Faire fall the face it couers.
And send you many louers.
Amen, so you be none.
Nay then will I be gone.
Madame, your father heere doth intimate, The paiment of a hundred thousand Crownes, Being but th' one halfe, of an intire summe, Disbursed by my father in his warres. But say that he, or we, as neither haue Receiu'd that summe; yet there remaines vnpaid A hundred thousand more: in surety of the which, One part of
Aquitaine
is bound to vs, Although not valued to the moneys worth. If then the King your father will restore But that one halfe which is vnsatisfied, We will giue vp our right in
Aquitaine,
And hold faire friendship with his Maiestie: But that it seemes he little purposeth, For here he doth demand to haue repaie, An hundred thousand Crownes, and not demands One paiment of a hundred thousand Crownes, To haue his title liue in
Aquitaine.
Which we much rather had depart withall, And haue the money by our father lent, Then
Aquitane,
so guelded as it is. Deare Princesse, were not his requests so farre From reasons yeelding, your faire selfe should make A yeelding 'gainst some reason in my brest, And goe well satisfied to
France
againe.
You doe the King my Father too much wrong, And wrong the reputation of your name, In so vnseeming to confesse receyt Of that which hath so faithfully beene paid.
I doe protest I neuer heard of it, And if you proue it, Ile repay it backe, Or yeeld vp
Aquitaine.
We arrest your word:
Boyet
,
you can produce acquittances For such a summe, from speciall Officers, Of
Charles
his Father.
Satisfie me so.
So please your Grace, the packet is not come Where that and other specialties are bound, To morrow you shall haue a sight of them.
It shall suffice me; at which enterview, All liberall reason would I yeeld vnto: Meane time, receiue such welcome at my hand, As honour, without breach of Honour may Make tender of, to thy true worthinesse. You may not come faire Princesse in my gates, But heere without you shall be so receiu'd, As you shall deeme your selfe lodg'd in my heart, Though so deni'd farther harbour in my house: Your owne good thoughts excuse me, and farewell, To morrow we shall visit you againe.
Sweet health & faire desires consort your grace.
Thy own wish wish I thee, in euery place.
Exit.
Lady, I will commend you to my owne heart.
Pray you doe my commendations, I would be glad to see it.
I would you heard it grone.
Is the soule sicke?
Sicke at the heart.
Alacke, let it bloud.
Would that doe it good?
My Phisicke saies I.
Will you prick't with your eye.
No poynt,
with my knife.
Now God saue thy life.
And yours from long liuing.
I cannot stay thanks-giuing.
Exit.
Enter Dumane.
Sir, I pray you a word: What Lady is that same?
The heire of
Alanson, Rosalin
her name.
A gallant Lady, Mounsier fare you well.
I beseech you a word: what is she in the white?
A woman somtimes, if you saw her in the light.
Perchance light in the light: I desire her name.
Shee hath but one for her selfe, To desire that were a shame.
Pray you sir, whose daughter?
Her Mothers, I haue heard.
Gods blessing
a
your beard.
Good sir be not offended, Shee is an heyre of
Faulconbridge.
Nay, my choller is ended: Shee is a most sweet Lady.
Exit. Long.
Not vnlike sir, that may be.
Enter Beroune.
What's her name in the cap.
Katherine
by good hap.
Is she wedded, or no.
To her
will
sir, or so,
You are welcome sir, adiew.
Fare well to me sir, and welcome to you.
Exit.
That last is
Beroune,
the mery mad-cap Lord. Not a word with him, but a iest.
And euery iest but a word.
It was well done of you to take him at his word.
I was as willing to grapple, as he was to boord.
Two hot Sheepes marie: And wherefore not Ships?
No Sheepe (sweet Lamb) vnlesse we feed on your
lips
.
You Sheepe & I pasture: shall that finish the iest?
So you grant pasture for me.
Not so gentle beast. My lips are no Common, though seuerall they be.
Belonging to whom?
To my fortunes and me.
Good wits wil be iangling, but gentles agree. This ciuill warre of wits were much better vsed On
Nauar
and his bookemen, for heere 'tis abus'd.
If my obseruation (which very seldome lies By the hearts still rhetoricke, disclosed with eyes) Deceiue me not now,
Nauar
is infected.
With what?
With that which we Louers intitle affected.
Your reason.
Why all his behauiours doe make their retire, To the court of his eye, peeping thorough desire. His hart like an Agot with your print impressed,
Proud with his forme, in his eie pride expressed. His tongue all impatient to speake and not see, Did stumble with haste in his eie-sight to be, All sences to that sence did make their repaire, To feele onely looking on fairest of faire: Me thought all his sences were lockt in his eye, As Iewels in Christall for some Prince to Buy. Who tendring their own worth from whence they were
glast
, Did point out to buy them along as you past. His faces owne margent did coate such amazes, That all eyes saw his eies inchanted with gazes. Ile giue you
Aquitaine,
and all that is his,
And
you giue him for my sake, but one louing Kisse.
Come to our Pauillion,
Boyet
is disposde.
But to speak that in words, which his eie hath dis-
clos'd.
I onelie haue made a mouth of his eie, By adding a tongue, which I know will not lie.
Thou art an old Loue-monger, and speakest skilfully.
He is
Cupids
Grandfather, and learnes news of him.
Then was
Venus
like her mother, for her fa- ther is but grim.
Do you heare my mad wenches?
No.
What then, do you see?
I
, our way to be gone.
You are too hard for me.
Exeunt omnes.
Actus Tertius.
Enter Braggart and Boy.
Song.
Warble childe, make passionate my sense of hea- ring.
Concolinel.
Sweete Ayer, go tendernesse of yeares: take this Key, giue enlargement to the swaine, bring him fe- stinatly hither: I must imploy him in a letter to my Loue.
Will you win your loue with a French braule?
How meanest thou, brauling in French?
No my compleat master, but to Iigge off a tune at the tongues end, canarie to it with the feete, humour it with turning vp your eie: sigh a note and sing a note, sometime through the throate: if you swallowed loue with singing, loue sometime through: nose as if you snuft vp loue by smelling loue with your hat penthouse- like ore the shop of your eies, with your armes crost on your thinbellie doublet, like a Rabbet on a spit, or your hands in your pocket, like a man after the old painting, and keepe not too long in one tune, but a snip and away: these are complements, these are humours, these betraie nice wenches that would be betraied without these, and make them men of note: do you note men that most are affected to these?
How hast thou purchased this experience?
By my penne of obseruation.
But O, but O.
The Hobbie-horse is forgot.
Cal'st thou my loue Hobbi-horse.
No Master, the Hobbie-horse is but a Colt, and and your Loue perhaps, a Hacknie: but haue you forgot your Loue?
Almost I had.
Negligent student, learne her by heart.
By heart, and in heart Boy.
And out of heart Master: all those three I will proue.
What wilt thou proue?
A man, if I liue (and this) by, in, and without, vp- on the instant: by heart you loue her, because your heart cannot come by her: in heart you loue her, because your heart is in loue with her: and out of heart you loue her, being out of heart that you cannot enioy her.
I am all these three.
And three times as much more, and yet nothing at all.
Fetch hither the Swaine, he must carrie mee a letter.
A message well simpathis'd, a Horse to be em- bassadour for an Asse.
Ha, ha, What saiest thou?
Marrie sir, you must send the Asse vpon the Horse for he is verie slow gated: but I goe.
The way is but short, away.
As swift as Lead sir.
Thy meaning prettie ingenious, is not Lead a mettall heauie, dull, and slow?
Minnime
honest Master, or rather Master no.
I say Lead is slow.
You are too swift sir to say so. Is that Lead slow which is fir'd from a Gunne?
Sweete smoke of Rhetorike, He reputes me a Cannon, and the Bullet that's he: I shoote thee at the Swaine.
Thump then, and I flee.
A most acute Iuuenall, voluble and free of grace, By thy fauour sweet Welkin, I must sigh in thy face. Most rude melancholie, Valour giues thee place. My Herald is return'd.
Enter Page and Clowne.
A wonder Master, here's a
Costard
broken in a shin.
Some enigma, some riddle, come, thy
Lenuoy
begin.
No egma, no riddle, no
lenuoy,
no salue, in thee male sir. Or sir, Plantan, a plaine Plantan: no
lenuoy,
no
lenuoy,
no Salue sir, but a Plantan.
By vertue, thou inforcest laughter, thy sillie thought, my spleene, the heauing of my lunges prouokes me to rediculous smyling: O pardon me my stars, doth the inconsiderate take
salue
for
lenuoy,
and the word
len-uoy
for a
salue
?
Doe the wise thinke them other, is not
lenuoy
a
salue
?
No
Page,
it is an epilogue or discourse to make
plaine
, Some obscure precedence that hath tofore bin faine. Now will I begin your morrall, and do you follow with my
lenuoy.
The Foxe, the Ape, and the Humble-Bee, Were still at oddes, being but three.
Vntill the Goose came out of doore, Staying the oddes by adding foure.
A good
Lenuoy,
ending in the Goose: would you desire more?
The Boy hath sold him a bargaine, a Goose, that's
flat.
Sir, your penny-worth is good,
and
your Goose be fat. To sell a bargaine well is as cunning as fast and loose: Let me see a fat
Lenuoy,
I
that's a fat Goose.
Come hither, come hither: How did this argument begin?
By saying that a
Costard
was broken in a shin. Then cal'd you for the
Lenuoy.
True, and I for a Plantan: Thus came your argument in: Then the Boyes fat
Lenuoy,
the Goose that you bought, And he ended the market.
But tell me: How was there a
Costard
broken in a shin?
I will tell you sencibly.
Thou hast no feeling of it
Moth,
I will speake that
Lenuoy.
I
Costard
running out, that was safely within, Fell ouer the threshold, and broke my shin.
We will talke no more of this matter.
Till there be more matter in the shin.
Sirra
Costard,
I will infranchise thee.
O, marrie me to one
Francis,
I smell some
Len-uoy,
some Goose in this.
By my sweete soule, I meane, setting thee at li- bertie. Enfreedoming thy person: thou wert emured, restrained, captiuated, bound.
True, true, and now you will be my purgation, and let me loose.
I giue thee thy libertie, set thee from durance, and in lieu thereof, impose on thee nothing but this: Beare this significant to the countrey Maide
Iaquenetta:
there is remuneration, for the best ward of mine honours is rewarding my dependants.
Moth,
follow.
Like the sequell I. Signeur
Costard
adew.
Exit.
My sweete ounce of mans flesh, my in- conie Iew: Now will I looke to his remuneration. Remuneration, O, that's the Latine word for three-far- things: Three-farthings remuneration, What's the price of this yncle? i.d. no, Ile giue you a remuneration: Why? It carries it remuneration: Why? It is a fairer name then a French-Crowne. I will neuer buy and sell out of this word.
Enter Berowne.
O my good knaue
Costard,
exceedingly well met.
Pray you sir, How much Carnation Ribbon may a man buy for a remuneration?
What is a remuneration?
Marrie sir, halfe pennie farthing.
O, Why then threefarthings worth of Silke.
I thanke your worship, God be wy you.
O stay slaue, I must employ thee: As thou wilt win my fauour, good my knaue, Doe one thing for me that I shall intreate.
When would you haue it done sir?
O this after-noone.
Well, I will doe it sir: Fare you well.
O thou knowest not what it is.
I shall know sir, when I haue done it.
Why villaine thou must know first.
I wil come to your worship to morrow morning.
It must be done this after-noone, Harke slaue, it is but this: The Princesse comes to hunt here in the Parke, And in her traine there is a gentle Ladie: When tongues speak sweetly, then they name her name, And
Rosaline
they call her, aske for her: And to her white hand see thou do commend This seal'd-vp counsaile. Ther's thy guerdon: goe.
Gardon, O sweete gardon, better then remune- ration,
a
leuenpence-farthing better: most sweete gar- don. I will doe it sir in print: gardon, remuneration.
Exit.
O, and I forsooth in loue, I that haue beene loues whip? A verie Beadle to a humerous sigh: A Criticke, Nay, a night-watch Constable. A domineering pedant ore the Boy, Then whom no mortall so magnificent, This wimpled, whyning, purblinde waiward Boy, This signior
Iunios
gyant dwarfe,
don
Cupid,
Regent of Loue-rimes, Lord of folded armes, Th' annointed soueraigne of sighes and groanes: Liedge of all loyterers and malecontents: Dread Prince of Placcats, King of Codpeeces. Sole Emperator and great generall Of trotting Parrators (O my little heart.) And I to be a Corporall of his field, And weare his colours like a Tumblers hoope. What? I loue, I sue, I seeke a wife, A woman that is like a Germane Cloake, Still
a
repairing: euer out of frame, And neuer going
a
right, being a Watch: But being watcht, that it may still goe right. Nay, to be periurde, which is worst of all: And among three, to loue the worst of all, A whitly wanton, with a veluet brow. With two pitch bals stucke in her face for eyes.
I
, and by heauen, one that will doe the deede, Though
Argus
were her Eunuch and her garde. And I to sigh for her, to watch for her, To pray for her, go to: it is a plague That
Cupid
will impose for my neglect, Of his almighty dreadfull little
might
. Well, I will loue, write, sigh, pray, shue, grone, Some men must loue my Lady, and some Ione.
Actus Quartus.
Enter the Princesse, a Forrester, her Ladies, and her Lords.
Was that the King that spurd his horse so hard, Against the steepe vprising of the hill?
I know not, but I thinke it was not he.
Who ere
a
was,
a
shew'd a mounting minde: Well Lords, to day we shall haue our dispatch, On Saterday we will returne to
France.
Then
Forrester
my friend, Where is the Bush That we must stand and play the murtherer in?
Hereby vpon the edge of yonder Coppice, A stand where you may make the fairest shoote.
I thanke my beautie, I am faire that shoote, And thereupon thou speak'st the fairest shoote.
Pardon me Madam, for I meant not so.
What, what? First praise me, & then again say no. O short liu'd pride. Not faire? alacke for woe.
Yes Madam faire.
Nay, neuer paint me now, Where faire is not, praise cannot mend the brow. Here (good my glasse) take this for telling true: Faire paiment for foule words, is more then due.
Nothing but faire is that which you inherit.
See, see, my beautie will be sau'd by merit. O heresie in faire, fit for these dayes, A giuing hand, though foule, shall haue faire praise. But come, the Bow: Now Mercie goes to kill, And shooting well, is then accounted
ill
: Thus will I saue my credit in the shoote, Not wounding, pittie would not let me do't: If wounding, then it was to shew my skill, That more for praise, then purpose meant to kill. And out of question, so it is sometimes: Glory growes guiltie of detested crimes, When for Fames sake, for praise an outward part, We bend to that, the working of the hart. As I for praise alone now seeke to spill The poore Deeres blood, that my heart meanes no
ill
.
Do not curst wiues hold that selfe-soueraigntie Onely for praise sake, when they striue to be Lords ore their Lords?
Onely for praise, and praise we may afford, To any Lady that subdewes a Lord.
Enter Clowne.
Here comes a member of the common-wealth.
God dig-you-den all, pray you which is the head Lady?
Thou shalt know her fellow, by the rest that haue no heads.
Which is the greatest Lady, the highest?
The thickest, and the tallest.
The thickest, & the tallest: it is so, truth is truth.
And
your waste Mistris, were as slender as my wit, One
a
these Maides girdles for your waste should be fit. Are not you the chiefe woma[n]? You are the thickest here?
What's your
will
sir? What's your
will
?
I haue a Letter from Monsier
Berowne,
To one Lady
Rosaline.
O thy letter, thy letter: He's a good friend of mine. Stand
a
side good bearer.
Boyet
,
you can carue, Breake vp this Capon.
I am bound to serue. This Letter is mistooke: it importeth none here: It is writ to
Iaquenetta.
We will read it, I sweare. Breake the necke of the Waxe, and euery one giue eare.
By heauen, that thou art faire, is most infallible: true that thou art beauteous, truth it selfe that thou art louely: more fairer then faire, beautifull then beautious, truer then truth it selfe: haue comiseration on thy heroi- call Vassall. The magnanimous and most illustrate King
Cophetua
set eie vpon the pernicious and indubitate Beg- ger
Zenelophon:
and he it was that might rightly say,
Ve-ni,
vidi, vici:
Which to annothanize in the vulgar, O base and obscure vulgar;
videliset,
He came, See, and o- uercame: hee came one; see, two; ouercame three: Who came? the King. Why did he come? to see. Why did he see? to ouercome. To whom came he? to the Begger. What saw he? the Begger. Who ouercame he? the Begger. The conclusion is victorie: On whose side? the King: the captiue is inricht: On whose side? the Beggers. The catastrophe is a Nuptiall: on whose side? the Kings: no, on both in one, or one in both. I am the King (for so stands the comparison) thou the Beg- ger, for so witnesseth thy lowlinesse. Shall I command thy loue? I may. Shall I enforce thy loue? I could. Shall I entreate thy loue? I will. What, shalt thou ex- change for ragges, roabes: for tittles titles, for thy selfe mee. Thus expecting thy reply, I prophane my lips on thy foote, my eyes on thy picture, and my heart on thy euerie part.
Thine in the dearest designe of industrie,
Don
Adriana de Armatho. Thus dost thou heare the Nemean Lion roare, Gainst thee thou Lambe, that standest as his pray: Submissiue fall his princely feete before, And he from forrage will incline to play. But if thou striue (poore soule) what art thou then? Foode for his rage, repasture for his den.
What plume of feathers is hee that indited this Letter? What veine? What Wethercocke? Did you euer heare better?
I am much deceiued, but I remember the stile.
Else your memorie is bad, going ore it erewhile.
This
Armado
is a
Spaniard
that keeps here in court A Phantasime, a Monarcho, and one that makes sport To the Prince and his Booke-mates.
Thou fellow, a word. Who gaue thee this Letter?
I told you, my Lord.
To whom should'st thou giue it?
From my Lord to my Lady.
From which Lord, to which Lady?
From my Lord
Berowne,
a good master of mine, To a Lady of
France,
that he call'd
Rosaline.
Thou hast mistaken his letter. Come Lords away. Here sweete, put vp this, 'twill be thine another day.
Exeunt.
Who is the shooter? Who is the shooter?
Shall I teach you to know.
I
my continent of beautie.
Why she that beares the Bow. Finely put off.
My Lady goes to kill hornes, but if thou marrie, Hang me by the necke, if hornes that yeare miscarrie. Finely put on.
Well then, I am the shooter.
And who is your Deare?
If we choose by the hornes, your selfe come not neare. Finely put on indeede.
You still wrangle with her
Boyet,
and shee strikes at the brow.
But she her selfe is hit lower: Haue I hit her now.
Shall I come vpon thee with an old saying, that was a man when King
Pippin
of
France
was a little boy, as touching the hit it.
So I may answere thee with one as old that was a woman when Queene
Guinouer
of
Brittaine
was a little wench, as touching the hit it.
Thou canst not hit it, hit it, hit it, Thou canst not hit it my good man.
I cannot, cannot, cannot:
And
I cannot, another can.
Exit.
By my troth most pleasant, how both did fit it.
A marke marueilous well shot, for they both did hit.
A mark, O marke but that marke: a marke saies my Lady. Let the mark haue a pricke in't, to meat at, if it may be.
Wide a'th bow hand, yfaith your hand is out.
Indeede
a
' must shoote nearer, or heele ne're hit the clout.
And
if my hand be out, then belike your hand is in.
Then will shee get the vpshoot by cleauing the is in.
Come, come, you talke greasely, your lips grow foule.
She's too hard for you at pricks, sir challenge her to boule.
I feare too much rubbing: good night my good Oule.
By my soule a Swaine, a most simple Clowne. Lord, Lord, how the Ladies and I haue put him downe. O my troth most sweete iests, most inconie vulgar wit, When it comes so smoothly off, so obscenely, as it were, so fit.
Armathor
ath to the side, O a most dainty man. To see him walke before a Lady, and to beare her Fan. To see him kisse his hand, and how most sweetly
a
will sweare: And his Page atother side, that handfull of wit, Ah heauens, it is most patheticall nit. Sowla, sowla.
Exeunt.
Shoote within.
Enter Dull, Holofernes, the Pedant and Nathaniel.
Very reuerent sport truely, and done in the testi- mony of a good conscience.
The Deare was (as you know) sanguis in blood, ripe as a Pomwater who now hangeth like a Iewell in the eare of
Celo
the skie; the welken the heauen, and a- non falleth like a Crab on the face of
Terra,
the soyle, the land, the earth.
Truely M[aster].
Holofernes,
the epythithes are sweetly varied like a scholler at the least: but sir I assure ye, it was a Bucke of the first head.
Sir
Nathaniel, haud credo.
'Twas not a
haud credo,
'twas a Pricket.
Most barbarous intimation: yet a kinde of insi- nuation, as it were
in via,
in way of explication
facere:
as it were replication, or rather
ostentare,
to show as it were his inclination after his vndressed, vnpolished, vneduca- ted, vnpruned, vntrained, or rather vnlettered, or rathe- rest vnconfirmed fashion, to insert againe my
haud credo
for a Deare.
I said the Deare was not a
haud credo,
'twas a Pricket.
Twice sod simplicitie,
bis coctus,
O thou mon- ster Ignorance, how deformed doost thou looke.
Sir hee hath neuer fed of the dainties that are bred in a booke. He hath not eate paper as it were: He hath not drunke inke. His intellect is not replenished, hee is onely an animall, onely sensible in the duller parts: and such barren plants are set before vs, that we thankfull should be: which we taste and feeling, are for those parts that doe fructifie in vs more then he. For as it would
ill
become me to be vaine, indiscreet, or a foole; So were there a patch set on Learning, to see him in a Schoole. But
omne
bene
say I, being of an old Fathers minde, Many can brooke the weather, that loue not the winde.
You two are book-men: Can you tell by your wit, What was a month old at
Cains
birth, that's not fiue weekes old as yet?
Dictisima
goodman
Dull, dictisima
goodman
Dull
.
What is
dictima
?
A title to
Phebe,
to
Luna,
to the
Moone.
The Moone was a month old when
Adam
was no more. And wrought not to fiue-weekes when he came to fiue
score
. Th' allusion holds in the Exchange.
'Tis true indeede, the Collusion holds in the Exchange.
God comfort thy capacity, I say th' allusion holds in the Exchange.
And I say the polusion holds in the Exchange: for the Moone is neuer but a month old: and I say be- side that, 'twas a Pricket that the Princesse kill'd.
Sir
Nathaniel,
will you heare an extemporall Epytaph on the death of the Deare, and to humour the ignorant call'd the Deare, the Princesse kill'd a Pricket.
Perge,
good M[aster].
Holofernes, perge,
so it shall please you to abrogate scurilitie.
I will something affect a letter, for it argues facilitie.
The prayfull Princesse pearst and prickt a prettie pleasing Pricket, Some say a Sore, but not a sore, till now made sore with shooting. The Dogges did yell, put ell to Sore, then Sorrell iumps from thicket: Or Pricket-sore, or else Sorell, the people fall
a
hooting. If Sore be sore, than ell to Sore, makes fiftie sores
O
sorell: Of one sore I an hundred make by adding but one more L.
A rare talent.
If a talent be a claw, looke how he clawes him with a talent.
This is a gift that I haue simple: simple, a foo- lish extrauagant spirit, full of formes, figures, shapes, ob- iects, Ideas, apprehensions, motions, reuolutions. These are begot in the ventricle of memorie, nourisht in the wombe of primater, and deliuered vpon the mellowing of occasion: but the gift is good in those in whom it is acute, and I am thankfull for it.
Sir, I praise the Lord for you, and so may my parishioners, for their Sonnes are well tutor'd by you, and their Daughters profit very greatly vnder you: you are a good member of the common-wealth.
Me hercle,
If their Sonnes be ingenuous, they shall want no instruction: If their Daughters be capable, I will put it to them. But
Vir sapis qui pauca loquitur,
a soule Feminine saluteth vs.
Enter Iaquenetta and the Clowne.
God giue you good morrow M[aster].
Person.
Master Person,
quasi
Person? And if one should be perst, Which is the one?
Marry M[aster]. Schoolemaster, hee that is likest to a hogshead.
Of persing a Hogshead, a good luster of con- ceit in a turph of Earth, Fire enough for a Flint, Pearle enough for a Swine: 'tis prettie, it is well.
Good Master Parson be so good as reade mee this Letter, it was giuen mee by
Costard,
and sent mee from
Don
Armatho:
I beseech you read it.
Facile precor gellida, quando pecas omnia sub vm- bra ruminat,
and so forth. Ah good old
Mantuan,
I may speake of thee as the traueiler doth of
Venice, vem-chie,
vencha, que non te vnde, que non te perreche.
Old
Man-tuan,
old
Mantuan.
Who vnderstandeth thee not,
vt re
sol
la
mi fa:
Vnder pardon sir, What are the contents? or rather as
Horrace
sayes in his, What my soule verses.
I
sir, and very learned.
Let me heare a staffe, a stanze, a verse,
Lege do-mine.
If Loue make me forsworne, how shall I sweare to loue? Ah neuer faith could hold, if not to beautie vowed. Though to my selfe forsworn, to thee Ile faithfull proue. Those thoughts to mee were Okes, to thee like Osiers bowed. Studie his byas leaues, and makes his booke thine eyes. Where all those pleasures liue, that
Art
would compre- hend. If knowledge be the marke, to know thee shall suffice. Well learned is that tongue, that well can thee co[m]mend. All ignorant that soule, that sees thee without wonder. Which is to me some praise, that I thy parts admire; Thy eye
Ioues
lightning beares, thy voyce his dreadfull thunder. Which not to anger bent, is musique, and sweete fire. Celestiall as thou art, Oh pardon loue this wrong, That sings heauens praise, with such an earthly tongue.
You finde not the apostraphas, and so misse the accent. Let me superuise the cangenet.
Here are onely numbers ratified, but for the elegancy, facility, & golden cadence of poesie
caret: O-uiddius
Naso
was the man. And why in deed
Naso,
but for smelling out the odoriferous flowers of fancy? the ierkes of inuention imitarie is nothing: So doth the Hound his master, the Ape his keeper, the tyred Horse his rider: But
Damosella virgin,
Was this directed to you?
I
sir from one mounsier
Berowne,
one of the strange Queenes Lords.
I will ouerglance the superscript.
To the snow-white hand of the most beautious Lady
Rosaline. I will looke againe on the intellect of the Letter, for the nomination of the partie written to the person writ- ten vnto.
Your Ladiships in all desired imployment,
Berowne.
Sir
Holofernes,
this
Berowne
is one of the Votaries with the King, and here he hath framed a Letter to a se- quent of the stranger Queens: which accidentally, or by the way of progression, hath miscarried. Trip and goe my sweete, deliuer this Paper into the hand of the King, it may concerne much: stay not thy complement, I forgiue thy duetie, adue.
Good
Costard
go with me: Sir God saue your life.
Haue with thee my girle.
Exit.
Sir you haue done this in the feare of God very religiously: and as a certaine Father saith
Sir tell not me of the Father, I do feare coloura- ble colours. But to returne to the Verses, Did they please you sir
Nathaniel
?
Marueilous well for the pen.
I do dine to day at the fathers of a certaine Pu- pill of mine, where if (being repast) it shall please you to gratifie the table with a Grace, I will on my priuiledge I haue with the parents of the foresaid Childe or Pupill, vndertake your
bien venuto,
where I will proue those Verses to be very vnlearned, neither sauouring of Poetrie, Wit, nor Inuention. I beseech your So- cietie.
And thanke you to: for societie (saith the text) is the happinesse of life.
And certes the text most infallibly concludes it. Sir I do inuite you too, you shall not say me nay:
pauca verba.
Away, the gentles are at their game, and we will to our recreation.
Exeunt.
Enter Berowne with a Paper in his hand, alone.
The King he is hunting the Deare, I am coursing my selfe. They haue pitcht a Toyle, I am toyling in a pytch, pitch that defiles; defile, a foule word: Well, set thee downe sorrow; for so they say the foole said, and so say I, and I the foole: Well proued wit. By the Lord this Loue is as mad as
Aiax,
it kils sheepe, it kils mee, I a sheepe: Well proued againe
a
my side. I will not loue; if I do hang me: yfaith I will not. O but her eye: by this light, but for her eye, I would not loue her; yes, for her two eyes. Well, I doe nothing in the world but lye, and lye in my throate. By heauen I doe loue, and it hath taught mee to Rime, and to be mallicholie: and here is part of my Rime, and heere my mallicholie. Well, she hath one a'my Sonnets already, the Clowne bore it, the Foole sent it, and the Lady hath it: sweet Clowne, swee- ter Foole, sweetest Lady. By the world, I would not care a pin, if the other three were in. Here comes one with a paper, God giue him grace to grone.
He stands aside. The King entreth.
Ay mee!
Shot by heauen: proceede sweet
Cupid,
thou hast thumpt him with thy Birdbolt vnder the left pap: in faith secrets.
So sweete a kisse the golden Sunne giues not, To those fresh morning drops vpon the Rose, As thy eye beames, when their fresh rayse haue smot. The night of dew that on my cheekes downe flowes. Nor shines the siluer Moone one halfe so bright, Through the transparent bosome of the deepe, As doth thy face through teares of mine giue light: Thou shin'st in euery teare that I doe weepe, No drop, but as a Coach doth carry thee: So ridest thou triumphing in my woe. Do but behold the teares that swell in me, And they thy glory through my griefe will show:
But doe not loue thy selfe, then thou wilt keepe My teares for glasses, and still make me weepe. O Queene of Queenes, how farre dost thou excell, No thought can thinke, nor tongue of mortall tell. How shall she know my griefes? Ile drop the paper. Sweete leaues shade folly. Who is he comes heere?
Enter Longauile. The King steps aside.
What
Longauill,
and reading: listen eare.
Now in thy likenesse, one more foole appeare.
Ay me, I am forsworne.
Why he comes in like a periure, wearing papers.
In loue I hope, sweet fellowship in shame.
One drunkard loues another of the name.
Am I the first
haue been periur'd so?
I could put thee in comfort, not by two that I
know
, Thou makest the triumphery, the corner cap of societie, The shape of Loues Tiburne, that hangs vp simplicitie.
I feare these stubborn lines lack power to moue. O sweet
Maria,
Empresse of my Loue, These numbers will I teare, and write in prose.
O Rimes are gards on wanton
Cupids
hose, Disfigure not his Shop.
This same shall goe.
He reades the Sonnet.
Did not the heauenly Rhetoricke of thine eye, 'Gainst whom the world cannot hold argument, Perswade my heart to this false periurie? Vowes for thee broke deserue not punishment. A Woman I forswore, but I will proue, Thou being a Goddesse, I forswore not thee. My Vow was earthly, thou a heauenly Loue. Thy grace being gain'd, cures all disgrace in me. Vowes are but breath, and breath a vapour is. Then thou faire Sun, which on my earth doest shine, Exhalest this vapor-vow, in thee it is: If broken then, it is no fault of mine: If by me broke, What foole is not so wise, To loose an oath, to win a Paradise?
This is the liuer veine, which makes flesh a deity. A greene Goose, a Goddesse, pure pure Idolatry. God amend vs, God amend, we are much out o'th' way.
Enter Dumaine.
By whom shall I send this (company?) Stay.
All hid, all hid, an old infant play, Like a demie God, here sit I in the skie, And wretched fooles secrets heedfully ore-eye. More Sacks to the myll. O heauens I haue my wish,
Dumaine
transform'd, foure Woodcocks in a dish.
O most diuine
Kate.
O most prophane coxcombe.
By heauen the wonder of a mortall eye.
By earth she is not, corporall, there you lye.
Her Amber haires for foule hath amber coted.
An Amber coloured Rauen was well noted.
As vpright as the Cedar.
Stoope I say, her shoulder is with-child.
As faire as day.
I
as some daies, but then no sunne must shine.
O that I had my wish?
And I had mine.
And mine too good Lord.
Amen, so I had mine: Is not that a good word?
I would forget her, but a Feuer she Raignes in my bloud, and will remembred be.
A Feuer in your bloud, why then incision Would let her out in Sawcers, sweet misprision.
Once more Ile read the Ode that I haue writ.
Once more Ile marke how Loue can varry Wit.
Dumane
reades his Sonnet.
On a day, alack the day: Loue, whose Month is euery
May
, Spied a blossome passing faire, Playing in the wanton ayre: Through the Veluet, leaues the winde, All vnseene, can passage finde. That the Louer sicke to death, Wish himselfe the heauens breath. Ayre (quoth he) thy cheekes may blowe, Ayre, would I might triumph so. But alacke my hand is sworne, Nere to plucke thee from thy throne: Vow alacke for youth vnmeete, youth so apt to plucke a sweet. Doe not call it sinne in me, That I am forsworne for thee. Thou for whom
Ioue
would sweare,
Iuno
but an Aethiop were, And denie himselfe for
Ioue.
Turning mortall for thy Loue.
This will I send, and something else more plaine. That shall expresse my true-loues fasting paine. O would the
King, Berowne
and
Longauill,
Were Louers too,
ill
to example
ill
, Would from my forehead wipe a periur'd note: For none offend, where all alike doe dote.
Dumaine,
thy Loue is farre from charitie, That in Loues griefe desir'st societie: You may looke pale, but I should blush I know, To be ore-heard, and taken napping so.
Come sir, you blush: as his, your case is such, You chide at him, offending twice as much. You doe not loue
Maria
?
Longauile,
Did neuer Sonnet for her sake compile; Nor neuer lay his wreathed armes athwart His louing bosome, to keepe downe his heart. I haue beene closely shrowded in this bush, And markt you both, and for you both did blush. I heard your guilty Rimes, obseru'd your fashion: Saw sighes reeke from you, noted well your passion. Aye me, sayes one! O
Ioue,
the other cries! On her haires were Gold, Christall the others eyes. You would for Paradise breake Faith and troth, And
Ioue
for your Loue would infringe an oath. What will
Berowne
say when that he shall heare Faith infringed, which such zeale did sweare. How will he scorne? how will he spend his wit? How will he triumph, leape, and laugh at it? For all the wealth that euer I did see, I would not haue him know so much by me.
Now step I forth to whip hypocrisie. Ah good my Liedge, I pray thee pardon me. Good heart, What grace hast thou thus to reproue These wormes for louing, that art most in loue? Your eyes doe make no couches in your teares. There is no certaine Princesse that appeares. You'll not be periur'd, 'tis a hatefull thing: Tush, none but Minstrels like of Sonnetting. But are you not asham'd? nay, are you not All three of you, to be thus much ore'shot? You found his Moth, the King your Moth did see: But I a Beame doe finde in each of three. O what a Scene of fool'ry haue I seene. Of sighes, of grones, of sorrow, and of teene: O me, with what strict patience haue I sat, To see a King transformed to a Gnat? To see great
Hercules
whipping a Gigge, And profound
Salomon
tuning a Iygge? And
Nestor
play at push-pin with the boyes, And
Critticke Tymon
laugh at idle toyes. Where lies thy griefe? O tell me good
Dumaine;
And gentle
Longauill,
where lies thy paine? And where my Liedges? all about the brest: A Candle hoa!
Too bitter is thy iest. Are wee betrayed thus to thy ouer-view?
Not you by me, but I betrayed to you. I that am honest, I that hold it sinne To breake the vow I am ingaged in. I am betrayed by keeping company With men, like men of inconstancie. When shall you see me write a thing in rime? Or grone for
Ioane
? or spend a minutes time, In pruning mee, when shall you heare that I will praise a hand, a foot, a face, an eye: a gate, a state, a brow, a brest, a waste, a legge, a limme.
Soft, Whither a-way so fast? A true man, or a theefe, that gallops so.
I post from Loue, good Louer let me go.
Enter Iaquenetta and Clowne.
God blesse the King.
What Present hast thou there?
Some certaine treason.
What makes treason heere?
Nay it makes nothing sir.
If it marre nothing neither, The treason and you goe in peace away together.
I beseech your Grace let this Letter be read, Our person mis-doubts it: it was treason he said.
Berowne,
read it ouer.
He reades the Letter.
Where hadst thou it?
Of
Costard.
Where hadst thou it?
Of
Dun Adramadio, Dun Adramadio.
How now, what is in you? why dost thou tear it?
A toy my Liedge, a toy: your grace needes not feare it.
It did moue him to passion, and therefore let's heare it.
It is
Berowns
writing, and heere is his name.
Ah you whoreson loggerhead, you were borne to doe me shame. Guilty my Lord, guilty: I confesse, I confesse.
What?
That you three fooles, lackt mee foole, to make vp the messe. He, he, and you: and you my Liedge, and I, Are picke-purses in Loue, and we deserue to die. O dismisse this audience, and I shall tell you more.
Now the number is euen.
True true, we are fowre: will these Turtles be gone?
Hence sirs, away.
Walk aside the true folke, & let the traytors stay.
Sweet Lords, sweet Louers, O let vs imbrace, As true we are as flesh and bloud can be, The Sea will ebbe and flow, heauen will shew his face: Young bloud doth not obey an old decree. We cannot crosse the cause why we are borne: Therefore of all hands must we be forsworne.
What, did these rent lines shew some loue of thine?
Did they, quoth you? Who sees the heauenly
Rosaline,
That (like a rude and sauage man of
Inde.
) At the first opening of the gorgeous East, Bowes not his vassall head, and strooken blinde, Kisses the base ground with obedient breast? What peremptory Eagle-sighted eye Dares looke vpon the heauen of her brow, That is not blinded by her maiestie?
What zeale, what furie, hath inspir'd thee now? My Loue (her Mistres) is a gracious Moone, Shee (an attending Starre) scarce seene a light.
My eyes are then no eyes, nor I
Berowne.
O, but for my Loue, day would turne to night, Of all complexions the cul'd soueraignty, Doe meet as at a faire in her faire cheeke, Where seuerall Worthies make one dignity, Where nothing wants, that want it selfe doth seeke. Lend me the flourish of all gentle tongues, Fie painted Rethoricke, O she needs it not, To things of sale, a sellers praise belongs: She passes prayse, then prayse too short doth blot. A withered Hermite, fiuescore winters worne, Might shake off fiftie, looking in her eye: Beauty doth varnish Age, as if new borne, And giues the Crutch the Cradles infancie. O 'tis the Sunne that maketh all things shine.
By heauen, thy Loue is blacke as Ebonie.
Is Ebonie like her? O word diuine? A wife of such wood were felicite. O who can giue an oth? Where is a booke? That I may sweare Beauty doth beauty lacke, If that she learne not of her eye to looke: No face is faire that is not full so blacke.
O paradoxe, Blacke is the badge of
hell
, The hue of dungeons, and the Schoole of night: And beauties crest becomes the heauens well.
Diuels soonest tempt resembling spirits of light. O if in blacke my Ladies browes be deckt, It mournes, that painting vsurping haire Should rauish doters with a false aspect: And therfore is she borne to make blacke, faire. Her fauour turnes the fashion of the dayes, For natiue bloud is counted painting now: And therefore red that would auoyd dispraise, Paints it selfe blacke, to imitate her brow.
To look like her are Chimny-sweepers blacke.
And since her time, are Colliers counted bright.
And
Aethiops
of their sweet complexion crake.
Dark needs no Candles now, for dark is light.
Your mistresses dare neuer come in raine, For feare their colours should be washt away.
'Twere good yours did: for sir to tell you plaine, Ile finde a fairer face not washt to day.
Ile proue her faire, or talke till dooms-day here.
No Diuell will fright thee then so much as shee.
I neuer knew man hold vile stuffe so deere.
Looke, heer's thy loue, my foot and her face see.
O if the streets were paued with thine eyes, Her feet were much too dainty for such tread.
O vile, then as she goes what vpward lyes? The street should see as she walk'd ouer head.
But what of this, are we not all in loue?
O nothing so sure, and thereby all forsworne.
Then leaue this chat, & good
Berown
now proue Our louing lawfull, and our fayth not torne.
I
marie there, some flattery for this euill.
O some authority how to proceed, Some tricks, some quillets, how to cheat the diuell.
Some salue for periurie,
O 'tis more then neede. Haue at you then affections men at armes, Consider what you first did sweare vnto: To fast, to study, and to see no woman: Flat treason against the Kingly state of youth. Say, Can you fast? your stomacks are too young: And abstinence ingenders maladies. And where that you haue vow'd to studie (Lords) In that each of you haue forsworne his Booke. Can you still dreame and pore, and thereon looke. For when would you my Lord, or you, or you, Haue found the ground of studies excellence, Without the beauty of a womans face; From womens eyes this doctrine I deriue, They are the Ground, the Bookes, the Achadems, From whence doth spring the true
Promethean
fire. Why, vniuersall plodding poysons vp The nimble spirits in the arteries, As motion and long during action tyres The sinnowy vigour of the trauailer. Now for not looking on a womans face, You haue in that forsworne the vse of eyes: And studie too, the causer of your vow. For where is any Author in the world, Teaches such beauty as a womans eye: Learning is but an adiunct to our selfe, And where we are, our Learning likewise is. Then when our selues we see in Ladies eyes, With our selues. Doe we not likewise see our learning there? O we haue made a Vow to studie, Lords, And in that vow we haue forsworne our Bookes: For when would you (my Leege) or you, or you? In leaden contemplation haue found out Such fiery Numbers as the prompting eyes, Of beauties tutors haue inrich'd you with: Other slow Arts intirely keepe the braine: And therefore finding barraine practizers, Scarce shew a haruest of their heauy toyle. But Loue first learned in a Ladies eyes, Liues not alone emured in the braine: But with the motion of all elements, Courses as swift as thought in euery power, And giues to euery power a double power, Aboue their functions and their offices. It addes a precious seeing to the eye: A Louers eyes will gaze an Eagle blinde. A Louers eare will heare the lowest sound. When the suspicious head of theft is stopt. Loues feeling is more soft and sensible, Then are the tender hornes of Cockle Snayles. Loues tongue proues dainty,
Bachus
grosse in taste, For Valour, is not Loue a
Hercules
? Still climing trees in the
Hesperides.
Subtill as
Sphinx,
as sweet and musicall, As bright
Apollo's
Lute, strung with his haire. And when Loue speakes, the voyce of all the Gods, Make heauen drowsie with the harmonie. Neuer durst Poet touch a pen to write, Vntill his Inke were tempred with Loues sighes: O then his lines would rauish sauage eares, And plant in Tyrants milde humilitie. From womens eyes this doctrine I deriue. They sparcle still the right promethean fire, They are the Bookes, the Arts, the Achademes, That shew, containe, and nourish all the world. Else none at all in ought proues excellent. Then fooles you were these women to forsweare: Or keeping what is sworne, you will proue fooles, For Wisedomes sake, a word that all men loue: Or for Loues sake, a word that loues all men. Or for Mens sake, the author of these Women: Or Womens sake, by whom we men are Men. Let's once loose our oathes to finde our selues, Or else we loose our selues, to keepe our oathes: It is religion to be thus forsworne. For Charity it selfe fulfills the Law: And who can seuer loue from Charity.
Saint
Cupid
then, and Souldiers to the field.
Aduance your standards, & vpon them Lords, Pell, mell, downe with them: but be first aduis'd, In conflict that you get the Sunne of them.
Now to plaine dealing, Lay these glozes by, Shall we resolue to woe these girles of France?
And winne them too, therefore let vs deuise, Some entertainment for them in their Tents.
First from the Park let vs conduct them thither, Then homeward euery man attach the hand Of his faire Mistresse, in the afternoone We will with some strange pastime solace them: Such as the shortnesse of the time can shape, For Reuels, Dances, Maskes, and merry houres, Fore-runne faire Loue, strewing her way with flowres.
Away, away, no time shall be omitted, That will be time, and may by vs be fitted.
Alone, alone sowed Cockell, reap'd no Corne, And Iustice alwaies whirles in equall measure: Light Wenches may proue plagues to men forsworne, If so, our Copper buyes no better treasure.
Exeunt.
Actus Quartus.
Enter the Pedant, Curate and Dull.
Satis quid sufficit.
I praise God for you sir, your reasons at dinner haue beene sharpe & sententious: pleasant without scur- rillity, witty without affection, audacious without im- pudency, learned without opinion, and strange without heresie: I did conuerse this
quondam
day with a compa- nion of the Kings, who is intituled, nominated, or called,
Don
Adriano de Armatho.
Noui hominum tanquam te,
His humour is lofty, his discourse peremptorie: his tongue filed, his eye ambitious, his gate maiesticall, and his generall behaui- our vaine, ridiculous, and thrasonicall. He is too picked, too spruce, too affected, too odde, as it were, too pere- grinat, as I may call it.
A most singular and choise Epithat,
Draw out his Table-booke.
He draweth out the thred of his verbositie, fi- ner then the staple of his argument. I abhor such pha- naticall phantasims, such insociable and poynt deuise companions, such rackers of ortagriphie, as to speake dout fine, when he should say doubt; det, when he shold pronounce debt; debt, not det: he clepeth a Calf, Caufe: halfe, haufe: neighbour
vocatur
nebour; neigh abreuiated ne: this is abhominable, which he would call abhomi- nable it insinuateth me of infamie:
ne inteligis domine,
to make franticke, lunaticke?
Laus deo, bene intelligo.
Bome boon for boon prescian,
a little scratcht, 'twil serue.
Enter Bragart, Boy.
Vides ne quis venit
?
Video, & gaudio.
Chirra.
Quari
Chirra, not Sirra?
Men of peace well incountred.
Most millitarie sir salutation.
They haue beene at a great feast of Languages, and stolne the scraps.
O they haue liu'd long on the almes-basket of words. I maruell thy M[aster]. hath not eaten thee for a word, for thou art not so long by the head as honorificabilitu-%dinitatibus: Thou art easier swallowed then a flapdra- gon.
Peace, the peale begins.
Mounsier, are you not lettred?
Yes, yes, he teaches boyes the Horne-booke: What is Ab speld backward with the horn on his head?
Ba,
puericia
with a horne added.
Ba most seely Sheepe, with a horne: you heare his learning.
Quis quis,
thou Consonant?
The last of the fiue Vowels if
You
repeat them, or the fift if
I
.
I will repeat them:
a
e
I
.
The Sheepe, the other two concludes it
o
u
.
Now by the salt waue of the mediteranium, a sweet tutch, a quicke venewe of wit, snip snap, quick & home, it reioyceth my intellect, true wit.
Offered by a childe to an olde man: which is wit-old.
What is the figure? What is the figure?
Hornes.
Thou disputes like an Infant: goe whip thy Gigge.
Lend me your Horne to make one, and I will whip about your Infamie
vnum cita
a gigge of a Cuck- olds horne.
And
I had but one penny in the world, thou shouldst haue it to buy Ginger bread: Hold, there is the very Remuneration I had of thy Maister, thou halfpenny purse of wit, thou Pidgeon-egge of discretion. O & the heauens were so pleased, that thou wert but my Bastard; What a ioyfull father wouldst thou make mee? Goe to, thou hast it
ad dungil,
at the fingers ends, as they say.
Oh I smell false Latine,
dunghel
for
vnguem.
Arts-man preambulat,
we will bee singled from the barbarous. Do you not educate youth at the Charg- house on the top of the Mountaine?
Or
Mons
the hill.
At your sweet pleasure, for the Mountaine.
I doe
sans question.
Sir, it is the Kings most sweet pleasure and af- fection, to congratulate the Princesse at her Pauilion, in the
posteriors
of this day, which the rude multitude call the after-noone.
The
posterior
of the day, most generous sir, is lia- ble, congruent, and measurable for the after-noone: the word is well culd, chose, sweet, and apt I doe assure you sir, I doe assure.
Sir, the King is a noble Gentleman, and my fa- miliar, I doe assure ye very good friend: for what is in- ward betweene vs, let it passe. I doe beseech thee re- member thy curtesie. I beseech thee apparell thy head: and among other importunate & most serious designes, and of great import indeed too: but let that passe, for I must tell thee it will please his Grace (by the world) sometime to leane vpon my poore shoulder, and with his royall finger thus dallie with my excrement, with my mustachio: but sweet heart let that passe. By the world I recount no fable, some certaine speciall honours it pleaseth his greatnesse to impart to
Armado
a Souldier, a man of trauell, that hath seene the world: but let that passe; the very all of all is: but sweet heart I do implore secrecie, that the King would haue mee present the Princesse (sweet chucke) with some delightfull ostenta- tion, or show, or pageant, or anticke, or fire-worke: Now, vnderstanding that the Curate and your sweet self are good at such eruptions, and sodaine breaking out of myrth (as it were) I haue acquainted you withall, to the end to craue your assistance.
Sir, you shall present before her the Nine Wor- thies. Sir
Holofernes,
as concerning some entertainment of time, some show in the posterior of this day, to bee rendred by our assistants the Kings command: and this most gallant, illustrate and learned Gentleman, before the Princesse: I say none so fit as to present the Nine Worthies.
Where will you finde men worthy enough to present them?
Iosua,
your selfe: my selfe, and this gallant gen- tleman
Iudas Machabeus;
this Swaine (because of his great limme or ioynt) shall passe
Pompey
the great, the Page
Hercules.
Pardon sir, error: He is not quantitie enough for that Worthies thumb, hee is not so big as the end of his Club.
Shall I haue audience: he shall present
Hercu-les
in minoritie: his
enter
and
exit
shall bee strangling a Snake; and I will haue an Apologie for that purpose.
An excellent deuice: so if any of the audience hisse, you may cry, Well done
Hercules,
now thou cru- shest the Snake; that is the way to make an offence gra- cious, though few haue the grace to doe it.
For the rest of the Worthies?
I will play three my selfe.
Thrice worthy Gentleman.
Shall I tell you a thing?
We attend.
We will haue, if this fadge not, an Antique. I beseech you follow.
Via
good-man
Dull,
thou hast spoken no word all this while.
Nor vnderstood none neither sir.
Alone, we will employ thee.
Ile make one in a dance, or so: or I will play on the taber to the Worthies, & let them dance the hey.
Most
Dull,
honest
Dull,
to our sport away.
Exit.
Enter Ladies.
Sweet hearts we shall be rich ere we depart, If fairings come thus plentifully in. A Lady wal'd about with Diamonds: Look you, what I haue from the louing King.
Madam, came nothing else along with that?
Nothing but this: yes as much loue in Rime, As would be cram'd vp in a sheet of paper Writ on both sides the leafe, margent and all, That he was faine to seale on
Cupids
name.
That was the way to make his god-head wax: For he hath beene fiue thousand yeeres a Boy.
I
, and a shrewd vnhappy gallowes too.
You'll nere be friends with him,
a
kild your sister.
He made her melancholy, sad, and heauy, and so she died: had she beene Light like you, of such a mer- rie nimble stirring spirit, she might
a
bin a Grandam ere she died. And so may you: For a light heart liues long.
What's your darke meaning mouse, of this light word?
A light condition in a beauty darke.
We need more light to finde your meaning out.
You'll marre the light by taking it in snuffe: Therefore Ile darkely end the argument.
Look what you doe, you doe it stil i'th darke.
So do not you, for you are a light Wench.
Indeed I waigh not you, and therefore light.
You waigh me not, O that's you care not for me.
Great reason: for past care, is still past cure.
Well bandied both, a set of Wit well played. But
Rosaline,
you haue a Fauour too? Who sent it? and what is it?
I would you knew.
And
if my face were but as faire as yours, My Fauour were as great, be witnesse this. Nay, I haue Verses too, I thanke
Berowne,
The numbers true, and were the numbring too. I were the fairest goddesse on the ground. I am compar'd to twenty thousand fairs. O he hath drawne my picture in his letter.
Any thing like?
Much in the letters, nothing in the praise.
Beauteous as Incke: a good conclusion.
Faire as a text B. in a Coppie booke.
Ware pensals. How? Let me not die your debtor, My red Dominicall, my golden letter. O that your face were full of Oes.
A Pox of that iest, and I beshrew all Shrowes: But
Katherine,
what was sent to you From faire
Dumaine
?
Madame, this Gloue.
Did he not send you twaine?
Yes Madame: and moreouer, Some thousand Verses of a faithfull Louer. A huge translation of hypocrisie, Vildly compiled, profound simplicitie.
This, and these Pearls, to me sent
Longauile.
The Letter is too long by halfe a mile.
I thinke no lesse: Dost thou wish in heart The Chaine were longer, and the Letter short.
I
, or I would these hands might neuer part.
We are wise girles to mocke our Louers so.
They are worse fooles to purchase mocking so. That same
Berowne
ile torture ere I goe. O that I knew he were but in by th' weeke, How I would make him fawne, and begge, and seeke, And wait the season, and obserue the times, And spend his prodigall wits in booteles rimes, And shape his seruice wholly to my deuice, And make him proud to make me proud that iests. So pertaunt like would I o'resway his state, That he shold be my foole, and I his fate.
None are so surely caught, when they are catcht, As Wit turn'd foole, follie in Wisedome hatch'd: Hath wisedoms warrant, and the helpe of Schoole, And Wits owne grace to grace a learned Foole?
The bloud of youth burns not with such excesse, As grauities reuolt to wantons be.
Follie in Fooles beares not so strong a note, As fool'ry in the Wise, when Wit doth dote: Since all the power thereof it doth apply, To proue by Wit, worth in simplicitie.
Enter Boyet.
Heere comes
Boyet,
and mirth in his face.
O I am stab'd with laughter, Wher's her Grace?
Thy newes
Boyet
?
Prepare Madame, prepare. Arme Wenches arme, incounters mounted are, Against your Peace, Loue doth approach, disguis'd: Armed in arguments, you'll be surpriz'd. Muster your Wits, stand in your owne defence, Or hide your heads like Cowards, and flie hence.
Saint
Dennis
to S[aint].
Cupid:
What are they, That charge their breath against vs? Say scout say.
Vnder the coole shade of a Siccamore, I thought to close mine eyes some halfe an houre: When lo to interrupt my purpos'd rest, Toward that shade I might behold addrest, The King and his companions: warely I stole into a neighbour thicket by, And ouer-heard, what you shall ouer-heare: That
by
and by disguis'd they will be heere. Their Herald is a pretty knauish Page: That well by heart hath con'd his embassage, Action and accent did they teach him there. Thus must thou speake, and thus thy body beare. And euer and anon they made a doubt, Presence maiesticall would put him out: For quoth the King, an Angell shalt thou see: Yet feare not thou, but speake audaciously. The Boy reply'd, An Angell is not euill: I should haue fear'd her, had she beene a deuill. With that all laugh'd, and clap'd him on the shoulder, Making the bold wagg by their praises bolder. One rub'd his elboe thus, and fleer'd, and swore, A better speech was neuer spoke before. Another with his finger and his thumb, Cry'd
via,
we will doo't, come what will come. The third he caper'd and cried, All goes well. The fourth turn'd on the toe, and downe he fell: With that they all did tumble on the ground, With such a zelous laughter so profound, That in this spleene ridiculous appeares, To checke their folly passions solemne teares.
But what, but what, come they to visit vs?
They do, they do; and are apparel'd thus, Like
Muscouites;
or
Russians,
as I gesse. Their purpose is to parlee, to court, and dance, And euery one his Loue-feat will aduance, Vnto his seuerall mistresse: which they'll know By fauours seuerall, which they did bestow.
And will they so? the Gallants shall be taskt: For Ladies; we will euery one be maskt, And not a man of them shall haue the grace Despight of sute, to see a Ladies face. Hold
Rosaline,
this Fauour thou shalt weare, And then the King will court thee for his Deare: Hold, take thou this my sweet, and giue me thine, So shall
Berowne
take me for
Rosaline.
And change your Fauours too, so shall your Loues Woo contrary, deceiu'd by these remoues.
Come on then, weare the fauours most in sight.
But in this changing, What is your intent?
The effect of my intent is to crosse theirs: They doe it but in mocking merriment, And mocke for mocke is onely my intent. Their seuerall counsels they vnbosome shall, To Loues mistooke, and so be mockt withall. Vpon the next occasion that we meete, With Visages displayd to talke and greete.
But shall we dance, if they desire vs too't?
No, to the death we will not moue a foot, Nor to their pen'd speech render we no grace: But while 'tis spoke, each turne away his face.
Why that contempt will kill the keepers heart, And quite diuorce his memory from his part.
Therefore I doe it, and I make no doubt, The rest will ere come in, if he be out. Theres no such sport, as sport by sport orethrowne: To make theirs ours, and ours none but our owne. So shall we stay mocking entended game, And they well mockt, depart away with shame.
Sound.
The Trompet sounds, be maskt, the maskers come.
Enter Black moores with musicke, the Boy with a speech, and the rest of the Lords disguised.
All haile, the richest Beauties on the earth.
Beauties no richer then rich Taffata.
A holy parcell of the fairest dames that euer turn'd their backes to mortall viewes.
The Ladies turne their backes to him.
Their eyes villaine, their eyes.
That euer turn'd their eyes to mortall viewes. Out
True, out indeed.
Out of your fauours heauenly spirits vouchsafe Not to beholde.
Once to behold, rogue.
Once to behold with your Sunne beamed eyes, With your Sunne beamed eyes.
They will not answer to that Epythite, you were best call it Daughter beamed eyes.
They do not marke me, and that brings me out.
Is this your perfectnesse? be gon you rogue.
What would these strangers? Know their mindes
Boyet.
If they doe speake our language, 'tis our
will
That some plaine man recount their purposes. Know what they would?
What would you with the Princes?
Nothing but peace, and gentle visitation.
What would they, say they?
Nothing but peace, and gentle visitation.
Why that they haue, and bid them so be gon.
She saies you haue it, and you may be gon.
Say to her we haue measur'd many miles, To tread a Measure with you on the grasse.
They say that they haue measur'd many a mile, To tread a Measure with you on this grasse.
It is not so. Aske them how many inches Is in one mile? If they haue measur'd manie, The measure then of one is easlie told.
If to come hither, you haue measur'd miles, And many miles: the Princesse bids you tell, How many inches doth fill vp one mile?
Tell her we measure them by weary steps.
She heares her selfe.
How manie wearie steps, Of many wearie miles you haue ore-gone, Are numbred in the trauell of one mile?
We number nothing that we spend for you, Our dutie is so rich, so infinite, That we may doe it still without accompt. Vouchsafe to shew the sunshine of your face, That we (like sauages) may worship it.
My face is but a Moone and clouded too.
Blessed are clouds, to doe as such clouds do. Vouchsafe bright Moone, and these thy stars to shine, (Those clouds remooued) vpon our waterie eyne.
O vaine peticioner, beg a greater matter, Thou now requests but Mooneshine in the water.
Then in our measure, vouchsafe but one change. Thou bidst me begge, this begging is not strange.
Play musicke then: nay you must doe it soone. Not yet no dance: thus change I like the Moone.
Will you not dance? How come you thus e- stranged?
You tooke the Moone at full, but now shee's changed?
Yet still she is the Moone, and I the Man.
The musick playes, vouchsafe some motion to it: Our eares vouchsafe it.
But your legges should doe it.
Since you are strangers, & come here by chance, Wee'll not be nice, take hands, we will not dance.
Why take you hands then?
Onelie to part friends. Curtsie sweet hearts, and so the Measure ends.
More measure of this measure, be not nice.
We can afford no more at such a price.
Prise your selues: What buyes your companie?
Your absence onelie.
That can neuer be.
Then cannot we be bought: and so adue, Twice to your Visore, and halfe once to you.
If you denie to dance, let's hold more chat.
In priuate then.
I am best pleas'd with that.
White handed Mistris, one sweet word with thee.
Hony, and Milke, and Suger: there is three.
Nay then two treyes,
an
if you grow so nice Methegline, Wort, and Malmsey; well runne dice: There's halfe a dozen sweets.
Seuenth sweet adue, since you can cogg, Ile play no more with you.
One word in secret.
Let it not be sweet.
Thou greeu'st my gall.
Gall, bitter.
Therefore meete.
Will you vouchsafe with me to change a word?
Name it.
Faire Ladie:
Say you so? Faire Lord: Take you that for your faire Lady.
Please it you, As much in priuate, and Ile bid adieu.
What, was your vizard made without a tong?
I know the reason Ladie why you aske.
O for your reason, quickly sir, I long.
You haue a double tongue within your mask, And would affoord my speechlesse vizard halfe.
Veale quoth the Dutch-man: is not Veale a Calfe?
A Calfe faire Ladie?
No, a faire Lord Calfe.
Let's part the word.
No, Ile not be your halfe: Take all and weane it, it may proue an Oxe.
Looke how you
but
your selfe in these sharpe mockes. Will you giue hornes chast Ladie? Do not so.
Then die a Calfe before your horns do grow.
One word in priuate with you ere I die.
Bleat softly then, the Butcher heares you cry.
The tongues of mocking wenches are as keen As is the Razors edge, inuisible: Cutting a smaller haire then may be seene, Aboue the sense of sence so sensible: Seemeth their conference, their conceits haue wings, Fleeter then arrows, bullets wind, thoght, swifter things
Not one word more my maides, breake off, breake off.
By heauen, all drie beaten with pure scoffe.
Farewell madde Wenches, you haue simple wits.
Exeunt.
Twentie adieus my frozen Muscouits. Are these the breed of wits so wondred at?
Tapers they are, with your sweete breathes puft out.
Wel-liking wits they haue, grosse, grosse, fat, fat.
O pouertie in wit, Kingly poore flout. Will they not (thinke you) hang themselues to night? Or euer but in vizards shew their faces: This pert
Berowne
was out of count'nance quite.
They were all in lamentable cases. The King was weeping ripe for a good word.
Berowne
did sweare himselfe out of all suite.
Dumaine
was at my seruice, and his sword: No point (quoth I:) my seruant straight was mute.
Lord
Longauill
said I came ore his hart: And trow you what he call'd me?
Qualme perhaps.
Yes in good faith.
Go sicknesse as thou art.
Well, better wits haue worne plain statute caps, But will you heare; the King is my loue sworne.
And quicke
Berowne
hath plighted faith to me.
And
Longauill
was for my seruice borne.
Dumaine
is mine as sure as barke on tree.
Madam, and prettie mistresses giue eare, Immediately they will againe be heere In their owne shapes: for it can neuer be, They will digest this harsh indignitie.
Will they returne?
They will they will, God knowes, And leape for ioy, though they are lame with blowes: Therefore change Fauours, and when they repaire, Blow like sweet Roses, in this summer aire.
How blow? how blow? Speake to bee vnder- stood.
Faire Ladies maskt, are Roses in their bud: Dismaskt, their damaske sweet commixture showne, Are Angels vailing clouds, or Roses blowne.
Auant perplexitie: What shall we do, If they returne in their owne shapes to wo?
Good Madam, if by me you'l be aduis'd. Let's mocke them still as well knowne as disguis'd: Let vs complaine to them what fooles were heare, Disguis'd like Muscouites in shapelesse geare: And wonder what they were, and to what end Their shallow showes, and Prologue vildely pen'd: And their rough carriage so ridiculous, Should be presented at our Tent to vs.
Ladies, withdraw: the gallants are at hand.
Whip to our Tents, as Roes runnes ore Land.
Exeunt.
Enter the King and the rest.
Faire sir, God saue you. Wher's the Princesse?
Gone to her Tent. Please it your Maiestie command me any seruice to her?
That she vouchsafe me audience for one word.
I will, and so will she, I know my Lord.
Exit.
This fellow pickes vp wit as Pigeons pease, And vtters it againe, when
Ioue
doth please. He is Wits Pedler, and retailes his Wares, At Wakes, and Wassels, Meetings, Markets, Faires. And we that sell by grosse, the Lord doth know, Haue not the grace to grace it with such show. This Gallant pins the Wenches on his sleeue. Had he bin
Adam,
he had tempted
Eue.
He can carue too, and lispe: Why this is he, That kist away his hand in courtesie. This is the Ape of Forme, Monsieur the nice, That when he plaies at Tables, chides the Dice In honorable tearmes: Nay he can sing A meane most meanly, and in Vshering Mend him who can: the Ladies call him sweete. The staires as he treads on them kisse his feete. This is the flower that smiles on euerie one, To shew his teeth as white as Whales bone. And consciences that wil not die in debt, Pay him the dutie of honie-tongued
Boyet.
A blister on his sweet tongue with my hart, That put
Armathoes
Page out of his part.
Enter the Ladies.
See where it comes. Behauiour what wer't thou, Till this madman shew'd thee? And what art thou now?
All haile sweet Madame, and faire time of day.
Faire in all Haile is foule, as I conceiue.
Construe my speeches better, if you may.
Then wish me better, I wil giue you leaue.
We came to visit you, and purpose now To leade you to our Court, vouchsafe it then.
This field shal hold me, and so hold your vow: Nor God, nor I, delights in periur'd men.
Rebuke me not for that which you prouoke: The vertue of your eie must breake my oth.
You nickname vertue: vice you should haue spoke: For vertues office neuer breakes men troth. Now by my maiden honor, yet as pure As the vnsallied Lilly, I protest, A world of torments though I should endure, I would not yeeld to be your houses guest: So much I hate a breaking cause to be Of heauenly oaths, vow'd with integritie.
O you haue liu'd in desolation heere, Vnseene, vnuisited, much to our shame.
Not so my Lord, it is not so I sweare, We haue had pastimes heere, and pleasant game, A messe of Russians left vs but of late.
How Madam? Russians?
I
in truth, my Lord. Trim gallants, full of Courtship and of state.
Madam speake true. It is not so my Lord: My Ladie (to the manner of the daies) In curtesie giues vndeseruing praise. We foure indeed confronted were with foure In Russia habit: Heere they stayed an houre, And talk'd apace: and in that houre (my Lord) They did not blesse vs with one happy word. I dare not call them fooles; but this I thinke, When they are thirstie, fooles would faine haue drinke.
This iest is drie to me. Gentle sweete, Your wits makes wise things foolish when we greete With eies best seeing, heauens fierie eie: By light we loose light; your capacitie Is of that nature, that to your huge stoore, Wise things seeme foolish, and rich things but poore.
This proues you wise and rich: for in my eie
I am a foole, and full of pouertie.
But that you take what doth to you belong, It were a fault to snatch words from my tongue.
O, I am yours, and all that I possesse.
All the foole mine.
I cannot giue you lesse.
Which of the Vizards what it that you wore?
Where? when? What Vizard? Why demand you this?
There, then, that vizard, that superfluous case, That hid the worse, and shew'd the better face.
We are discried, They'l mocke vs now downeright.
Let vs confesse, and turne it to a iest.
Amaz'd my Lord? Why lookes your Highnes sadde?
Helpe hold his browes, hee'l sound: why looke you pale? Sea-sicke I thinke comming from Muscouie.
Thus poure the stars down plagues for periury. Can any face of brasse hold longer out? Heere stand I, Ladie dart thy skill at me, Bruise me with scorne, confound me with a flout. Thrust thy sharpe wit quite through my ignorance. Cut me to peeces with thy keene conceit: And I will wish thee neuer more to dance, Nor neuer more in Russian habit waite. O! neuer will I trust to speeches pen'd, Nor to the motion of a Schoole-boies tongue. Nor neuer come in vizard to my friend, Nor woo in rime like a blind-harpers songue, Taffata phrases, silken tearmes precise, Three-pil'd Hyperboles, spruce affection; Figures pedanticall, these summer flies, Haue blowne me full of maggot ostentation. I do forsweare them, and I heere protest, By this white Gloue (how white the hand God knows) Henceforth my woing minde shall be exprest In russet yeas, and honest kersie noes. And to begin Wench, so God helpe me law, My loue to thee is sound,
sans
cracke or flaw,
Sans, sans,
I pray you.
Yet I haue a tricke Of the old rage: beare with me, I am sicke. Ile leaue it by degrees: soft, let vs see, Write
Lord haue mercie on vs,
on those three, They are infected, in their hearts it lies: They haue the plague, and caught it of your eyes: These Lords are visited, you are not free: For the Lords tokens on you do I see.
No, they are free that gaue these tokens to vs.
Our states are forfeit, seeke not to vndo vs.
It is not so; for how can this be true, That you stand forfeit, being those that sue.
Peace, for I will not haue to do with you.
Nor shall not, if I do as I intend.
Speake for your selues, my wit is at an end.
Teach vs sweete Madame, for our rude trans- gression, some faire excuse.
The fairest is confession. Were you not heere but euen now, disguis'd?
Madam, I was.
And were you well aduis'd?
I was faire Madam.
When you then were heere, What did you whisper in your Ladies eare?
That more then all the world I did respect her
When shee shall challenge this, you will reiect her.
Vpon mine Honor no.
Peace, peace, forbeare: Your oath once broke, you force not to forsweare.
Despise me when I breake this oath of mine.
I will, and therefore keepe it.
Rosaline,
What did the Russian whisper in your eare?
Madam, he swore that he did hold me deare As precious eye-sight, and did value me Aboue this World: adding thereto moreouer, That he would Wed me, or else die my Louer.
God giue thee ioy of him: the Noble Lord Most honorably doth vphold his word.
What meane you Madame? By my life, my troth I neuer swore this Ladie such an oth.
By heauen you did; and to confirme it plaine, You gaue me this: But take it sir againe.
My faith and this, the Princesse I did giue, I knew her by this Iewell on her sleeue.
Pardon me sir, this Iewell did she weare. And Lord
Berowne
(I thanke him) is my deare. What? Will you haue me, or your Pearle againe?
Neither of either, I remit both twaine. I see the tricke on't: Heere was a consent, Knowing aforehand of our merriment, To dash it like a Christmas Comedie. Some carry-tale, some please-man, some slight Zanie, Some mumble-newes, some trencher-knight, som Dick That smiles his cheeke in yeares, and knowes the trick To make my Lady laugh, when she's dispos'd; Told our intents before: which once disclos'd, The Ladies did change Fauours; and then we Following the signes, woo'd but the signe of
she
. Now to our periurie, to adde more terror, We are againe forsworne in
will
and error. Much vpon this tis: and might not you Forestall our sport, to make vs thus vntrue? Do not you know my Ladies foot by'th squier? And laugh vpon the apple of her eie? And stand betweene her backe sir, and the fire, Holding a trencher, iesting merrilie? You put our Page out: go, you are alowd. Die when you will, a smocke shall be your shrowd. You leere vpon me, do you? There's an eie Wounds like a Leaden sword.
Full merrily hath this braue manager, this car- reere bene run.
Loe, he is tilting straight. Peace, I haue don.
Enter Clowne.
Welcome pure wit, thou part'st a faire fray.
O Lord sir, they would kno, Whether the three worthies shall come in, or no.
What, are there but three?
No sir, but it is vara fine, For euerie one pursents three.
And three times thrice is nine.
Not so sir, vnder correction sir, I hope it is not so. You cannot beg vs sir, I can assure you sir, we know what we know: I hope sir three times thrice sir.
Is not nine.
Vnder correction sir, wee know where-vntill it doth amount.
By Ioue, I alwaies tooke three threes for nine.
O Lord sir, it were pittie you should get your liuing by reckning sir.
How much is it?
O Lord sir, the parties themselues, the actors sir will shew where-vntill it doth amount: for mine owne part, I am (as they say, but to perfect one man in one poore man)
Pompion
the great sir.
Art thou one of the Worthies?
It pleased them to thinke me worthie of
Pompey
the great: for mine owne part, I know not the degree of the Worthie, but I am to stand for him.
Go, bid them prepare.
Exit.
We will turne it finely off sir, we wil take some care.
Berowne,
they will shame vs: Let them not approach.
We are shame-proofe my Lord: and 'tis some policie, to haue one shew worse then the Kings and his companie.
I say they shall not come.
Nay my good Lord, let me ore-rule you now; That sport best pleases, that doth least know how. Where Zeale striues to content, and the contents Dies in the Zeale of that which it presents: Their forme confounded, makes most forme in mirth, When great things labouring perish in their birth.
A right description of our sport my Lord.
Enter Braggart.
Annointed, I implore so much expence of thy royall sweet breath, as will vtter a brace of words.
Doth this man serue God?
Why aske you?
He speak's not like a man of God's making.
That's all one my faire sweet honie Monarch: For I protest, the Schoolmaster is exceeding fantasticall: Too too vaine, too too vaine. But we wil put it (as they say) to
Fortuna delaguar,
I wish you the peace of minde most royall cupplement.
Here is like to be a good presence of Worthies; He presents
Hector
of Troy, the Swaine
Pompey
 
great, the Parish Curate
Alexander, Armadoes
Page
Hercules,
the Pedant
Iudas Machabeus:
and if these foure Wor- thies in their first shew thriue, these foure will change habites, and present the other fiue.
There is fiue in the first shew.
You are deceiued, tis not so.
The Pedant, the Braggart, the Hedge-Priest, the Foole, and the Boy, Abate throw at Novum, and the whole world againe, Cannot pricke out fiue such, take each one in's vaine.
The ship is vnder saile, and here she coms amain.
Enter Pompey.
I Pompey am.
You lie, you are not he.
I Pompey am.
With Libbards head on knee.
Well said old mocker, I must needs be friends with thee.
I Pompey am, Pompey surnam'd the big.
The great.
It is great sir:
Pompey surnam'd the great: That oft in field, with Targe and Shield, did make my foe to sweat:
And trauailing along this coast, I heere am come by chance, And lay my Armes before the legs of this sweet Lasse of France.
If your Ladiship would say thankes
Pompey,
I had done.
Great thankes great
Pompey.
Tis not so much worth: but I hope I was per- fect. I made a little fault in great.
My hat to a halfe-penie, Pompey prooues the best Worthie.
Enter Curate for Alexander.
When in the world I liu'd, I was the worldes Com-mander:
By East, West, North, & South, I spred my conquering
might
My Scutcheon plaine declares that I am Alisander.
Your nose saies
no
, you are not: For it stands too right.
Your nose smells
no
, in this most tender smel- ling Knight.
The Conqueror is dismaid: Proceede good
Alexander.
When in the world I liued, I was the worldes Com-mander.
Most true, 'tis right; you were so
Alisander.
Pompey the great.
your seruant and
Costard.
Take away the Conqueror, take away
Alisander
O sir, you haue ouerthrowne
Alisander
the con- queror: you will be scrap'd out of the painted cloth for this: your Lion that holds his Pollax sitting on a close stoole, will be giuen to Aiax. He will be the ninth wor- thie. A Conqueror, and affraid to speake? Runne away for shame
Alisander.
There an't shall please you: a foo- lish milde man, an honest man, looke you, & soon dasht. He is a maruellous good neighbour insooth, and a verie good Bowler: but for
Alisander,
alas you see, how 'tis a little ore-parted. But there are Worthies
a
comming, will speake their minde in some other sort.
Exit Cu.
Stand aside good Pompey.
Enter Pedant for Iudas, and the Boy for Hercules.
Great
Hercules
is presented by this Impe, Whose Club kil'd
Cerberus
that three-headed
Canus,
And when he was a babe, a childe, a shrimpe, Thus did he strangle Serpents in his
Manus: Quoniam,
he seemeth in minoritie,
Ergo,
I come with this Apologie. Keepe some state in thy
exit
,
and vanish.
Exit Boy
Iudas
I am.
A Iudas?
Not Iscariot sir. Iudas I am, ycliped Machabeus.
Iudas Machabeus
clipt, is plaine Iudas.
A kissing traitor. How art thou prou'd
Iudas
?
Iudas I am.
The more shame for you
Iudas.
What meane you sir?
To make
Iudas
hang himselfe.
Begin sir, you are my elder.
Well follow'd,
Iudas
was hang'd on an Elder.
I will not be put out of countenance.
Because thou hast no face.
What is this?
A Citterne head.
The head of a bodkin.
A deaths face in a ring.
The face of an old Roman coine, scarce seene.
The pummell of
Caesars
Faulchion.
The caru'd-bone face on a Flaske.
S[aint]. Georges halfe cheeke in a brooch.
I
, and in a brooch of Lead.
I
, and worne in the cap of a Tooth-drawer. And now forward, for we haue put thee in countenance
You haue put me out of countenance.
False, we haue giuen thee faces.
But you haue out-fac'd them all.
And
thou wer't a Lion, we would do so.
Therefore as he is, an Asse, let him go: And so adieu sweet
Iude.
Nay, why dost thou stay?
For the latter end of his name.
For the
Asse
to the
Iude:
giue it him.
Iud-as
a- way.
This is not generous, not gentle, not humble.
A light for monsieur
Iudas,
it growes darke, he may stumble.
Alas poore
Machabeus,
how hath hee beene baited.
Enter Braggart.
Hide thy head
Achilles,
heere comes
Hector
in Armes.
Though my mockes come home by me, I will now be merrie.
Hector
was but a Troyan in respect of this.
But is this
Hector
?
I thinke
Hector
was not so cleane timber'd.
His legge is too big for
Hector.
More Calfe certaine.
No, he is best indued in the small.
This cannot be
Hector.
He's a God or a Painter, for he makes faces.
The Armipotent Mars, of Launces the almighty, gaue
Hector
a gift.
A gilt Nutmegge.
A Lemmon.
Stucke with Cloues.
No clouen.
The Armipotent Mars of Launces the almighty, Gaue Hector a gift, the heire of Illion; A man so breathed, that certaine he would fight: yea From morne till night, out of his Pauillion.
I am that Flower.
That Mint.
That Cullambine.
Sweet Lord
Longauill
reine thy tongue.
I must rather giue it the reine: for it runnes a- gainst
Hector.
I
, and
Hector
's a Grey-hound.
The sweet War-man is dead and rotten, Sweet chuckes, beat not the bones of the buried: But I will forward with my deuice; Sweete Royaltie bestow on me the sence of hearing.
Berowne
steppes forth.
Speake braue Hector, we are much delighted.
i do adore thy sweet Graces slipper.
Loues her by the foot.
He may not by the yard.
This Hector farre surmounted Hanniball. The partie is gone.
Fellow
Hector,
she is gone; she is two moneths on her way.
What meanest thou?
Faith vnlesse you play the honest Troyan, the poore Wench is cast away: she's quick, the child brags in her belly alreadie: tis yours.
Dost thou infamonize me among Potentates? Thou shalt die.
Then shall Hector be whipt for
Iaquenetta
that is quicke by him, and hang'd for
Pompey,
that is dead by him.
Most rare
Pompey.
Renowned
Pompey.
Greater then great, great, great, great
Pompey: Pompey
the huge.
Hector trembles.
Pompey
is moued, more Atees more Atees stirre them, or stirre them on.
Hector will challenge him.
I
, if a'haue no more mans blood in's belly, then will sup a Flea.
By the North-pole I do challenge thee.
I wil not fight with a pole like a Northern man; Ile slash, Ile do it by the sword: I pray you let mee bor- row my Armes againe.
Roome for the incensed Worthies.
Ile do it in my shirt.
Most resolute
Pompey.
Master, let me take you a button hole lower: Do you not see
Pompey
is vncasing for the combat: what meane you? you will lose your reputation.
Gentlemen and Souldiers pardon me, I will not combat in my shirt.
You may not denie it,
Pompey
hath made the challenge.
Sweet bloods, I both may, and will.
What reason haue you for't?
The naked truth of it is, I haue no shirt, I go woolward for penance.
True, and it was inioyned him in
Rome
for want of Linnen: since when, Ile be sworne he wore none, but a dishclout of
Iaquenettas,
and that hee weares next his heart for a fauour.
Enter a Messenger, Monsieur Marcade.
God saue you Madame.
Welcome
Marcade,
but that thou interruptest our merriment.
I am sorrie Madam, for the newes I bring is heauie in my tongue. The King your father
Dead for my life.
Euen so: My tale is told.
Worthies away, the Scene begins to cloud.
For mine owne part, I breath free breath: I haue seene the day of wrong, through the little hole of discretion, and I will right my selfe like a Souldier.
Exeunt Worthies
How fare's your Maiestie?
Boyet
prepare, I will away to night.
Madame not so, I do beseech you stay.
Prepare I say. I thanke you gracious Lords For all your faire endeuours and entreats: Out of a new sad-soule, that you vouchsafe, In your rich wisedome to excuse, or hide, The liberall opposition of our spirits, If ouer-boldly we haue borne our selues, In the conuerse of breath (your gentlenesse Was guiltie of it.) Farewell worthie Lord: A heauie heart beares not a humble tongue. Excuse me so, comming so short of thankes, For my great suite, so easily obtain'd.
The extreme parts of time, extremelie formes All causes to the purpose of his speed: And often at his verie loose decides That, which long processe could not arbitrate. And though the mourning brow of progenie Forbid the smiling curtesie of Loue: The holy suite which faine it would conuince, Yet since loues argument was first on foote, Let not the cloud of sorrow iustle it From what it purpos'd: since to waile friends lost, Is not by much so wholsome profitable, As to reioyce at friends but newly found.
I vnderstand you not, my greefes are double.
Honest plain words, best pierce the ears of griefe And by these badges vnderstand the King, For your faire sakes haue we neglected time, Plaid foule play with our oaths: your beautie Ladies Hath much deformed vs, fashioning our humors Euen to the opposed end of our intents. And what in vs hath seem'd ridiculous: As Loue is full of vnbefitting straines, All wanton as a childe, skipping and vaine. Form'd by the eie, and therefore like the eie. Full of straying shapes, of habits, and of formes Varying in subiects as the eie doth roule, To euerie varied obiect in his glance: Which partie-coated presence of loose loue Put on by vs, if in your heauenly eies, Haue misbecom'd our oathes and grauities. Those heauenlie eies that looke into these faults, Suggested vs to make: therefore Ladies Our loue being yours, the error that Loue makes Is likewise yours. We to our selues proue false, By being once false, for euer to be true To those that make vs both, faire Ladies you. And euen that falshood in it selfe a sinne, Thus purifies it selfe, and turnes to grace.
We haue receiu'd your Letters, full of Loue: Your Fauours, the Ambassadors of Loue. And in our maiden counsaile rated them, At courtship, pleasant iest, and curtesie, As bumbast and as lining to the time: But more deuout then these are our respects Haue we not bene, and therefore met your loues In their owne fashion, like a merriment.
Our letters Madam, shew'd much more then iest.
So did our lookes.
We did not coat them so.
Now at the latest minute of the houre, Grant vs your loues.
A time me thinkes too short, To make a world-without-end bargaine in: No, no my Lord, your Grace is periur'd much, Full of deare guiltinesse, and therefore this: If for my Loue (as there is no such cause) You will do ought, this shall you do for me. Your oth I will not trust: but go with speed To some forlorne and naked Hermitage, Remote from all the pleasures of the world: There stay, vntill the twelue Celestiall Signes Haue brought about their annuall reckoning. If this austere insociable life, Change not your offer made in heate of blood: If frosts, and fasts, hard lodging, and thin weeds Nip not the gaudie blossomes of your Loue, But that it beare this triall, and last loue: Then at the expiration of the yeare, Come challenge me, challenge me by these deserts, And by this Virgin palme, now kissing thine, I will be thine: and till that instant shut My wofull selfe vp in a mourning house, Raining the teares of lamentation, For the remembrance of my Fathers death. If this thou do denie, let our hands part, Neither intitled in the others hart.
If this, or more then this, I would denie, To flatter vp these powers of mine with rest, The sodaine hand of death close vp mine eie. Hence euer then, my heart is in thy brest.
And what to me my Loue? and what to me?
You must be purged too, your sins are rack'd. You are attaint with faults and periurie: Therefore if you my fauor meane to get, A tweluemonth shall you spend, and neuer rest, But seeke the wearie beds of people sicke.
But what to me my loue? but what to me?
A wife? a beard, faire health, and honestie, With three-fold loue, I wish you all these three.
O shall I say, I thanke you gentle wife?
Not so my Lord, a tweluemonth and a day, Ile marke no words that smoothfac'd wooers say. Come when the King doth to my Ladie come: Then if I haue much loue, Ile giue you some.
Ile serue thee true and faithfully till then.
Yet sweare not, least ye be forsworne agen.
What saies
Maria
?
At the tweluemonths end, Ile change my blacke Gowne, for a faithfull friend.
Ile stay with patience: but the time is long.
The liker you, few taller are so yong.
Studies my Ladie? Mistresse, looke on me, Behold the window of my heart, mine eie: What humble suite attends thy answer there, Impose some seruice on me for my loue.
Oft haue I heard of you my Lord
Berowne,
Before I saw you: and the worlds large tongue Proclaimes you for a man repleate with mockes, Full of comparisons, and wounding floutes: Which you on all estates will execute, That lie within the mercie of your wit. To weed this Wormewood from your fruitfull braine, And therewithall to win me, if you please, Without the which I am not to be won: You shall this tweluemonth terme from day to day, Visit the speechlesse sicke, and still conuerse With groaning wretches: and your taske shall be, With all the fierce endeuour of your wit, To enforce the pained impotent to smile.
To moue wilde laughter in the throate of death? It cannot be, it is impossible. Mirth cannot moue a soule in agonie.
Why that's the way to choke a gibing spirit, Whose influence is begot of that loose grace, Which shallow laughing hearers giue to fooles: A iests prosperitie, lies in the eare Of him that heares it, neuer in the tongue Of him that makes it: then, if sickly eares, Deaft with the clamors of their owne deare grones, Will heare your idle scornes; continue then, And I will haue you, and that fault withall. But if they will not, throw away that spirit, And I shal finde you emptie of that fault, Right ioyfull of your reformation.
A tweluemonth? Well: befall what will befall, Ile iest a tweluemonth in an Hospitall.
I
sweet my Lord, and so I take my leaue.
No Madam, we will bring you on your way.
Our woing doth not end like an old Play: Iacke hath not Gill: these Ladies courtesie Might wel haue made our sport a Comedie.
Come sir, it wants a tweluemonth and a day, And then 'twil end.
That's too long for a play.
Enter Braggart.
Sweet Maiesty vouchsafe me.
Was not that Hector?
The worthie Knight of Troy.
I wil kisse thy royal finger, and take leaue. I am a Votarie, I haue vow'd to
Iaquenetta
to holde the Plough for her sweet loue three yeares. But most estee- med greatnesse, wil you heare the Dialogue that the two Learned men haue compiled, in praise of the Owle and the Cuckow? It should haue followed in the end of our shew.
Call them forth quickely, we will do so.
Holla, Approach.
Enter all.
This side is
Hiems,
Winter. This
Ver,
the Spring: the one maintained by the Owle, Th' other by the Cuckow.
Ver,
begin.
The Song.
When Dasies pied, and Violets blew, And Cuckow-buds of yellow hew: And Ladie-smockes all siluer white, Do paint the Medowes with delight. The Cuckow then on euerie tree, Mockes married men, for thus sings he, Cuckow. Cuckow, Cuckow: O word of feare, Vnpleasing to a married eare. When Shepheards pipe on Oaten strawes, And merrie Larkes are Ploughmens clockes: When Turtles tread, and Rookes and Dawes, And Maidens bleach their summer smockes: The Cuckow then on euerie tree Mockes married men; for thus sings he, Cuckow. Cuckow, Cuckow: O word of feare, Vnpleasing to a married eare.
When Isicles hang by the wall, And Dicke the Shepheard blowes his naile; And Tom beares Logges into the hall, And Milke comes frozen home in paile: When blood is nipt, and waies be fowle, Then nightly sings the staring Owle Tu-whit to- who. A merrie note, While greasie Ione doth keele the pot. When all aloud the winde doth blow, And coffing drownes the Parsons saw: And birds sit brooding in the snow, And Marrians nose lookes red and raw: When roasted Crabs hisse in the bowle, Then nightly sings the staring Owle, Tu-whit to- who: A merrie note, While greasie Ione doth keele the pot.
The Words of Mercurie, Are harsh after the songs of Apollo: You that way; we this way.
Exeunt omnes.
